Atlas of
DIABETES MELLITUS




Atlas of
DIABETES MELLITUS
Third Edition 
Ian N Scobie MD FRCP
Consultant Endocrinologist
Medway Maritime Hospital
Gillingham, Kent
UK

© 2007 Informa UK Ltd
First published in the United Kingdom in 1998 by Parthenon Publishing
Third edition published in 2007 by Informa Healthcare, 4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN.
Informa Healthcare is a trading division of Informa UK Ltd. Registered Office: 37/41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH.
Registered in England and Wales Number 1072954.
Tel.: +44 (0)20 7017 6000
Fax: +44 (0)20 7017 6699
E-mail: info.medicine@tandf.co.uk
Website: www.informahealthcare.com
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior permission of
the publisher or in accordance with the provisions of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 or under the terms
of any licence permitting limited copying issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency, 90 Tottenham Court Road, London
W1P 0LP.

W1P 0LP.
Although every effort has been made to ensure that all owners of copyright material have been acknowledged in this
publication, we would be glad to acknowledge in subsequent reprints or editions any omissions brought to our attention.
A CIP record for this book is available from the British Library.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Data available on application
ISBN10: 0-415-37649-1
ISBN13: 978-0-415-37649-5
Distributed in North and South America by
Taylor & Francis
6000 Broken Sound Parkway, NW, (Suite 300)
Boca Raton, FL 33487, USA
Within Continental USA
Tel.: 1(800)272 7737; Fax: 1(800)374 3401
Outside Continental USA
Tel.: (561)994 0555; Fax: (561)361 6018
E-mail: orders@crcpress.com
Distributed in the rest of the world by
Thomson Publishing Services
Cheriton House
North Way
Andover, Hampshire SP10 5BE, UK
Tel.: +44 (0)1264 332424
E-mail: tps.tandfsalesorder@thomson.com 
Composition by Parthenon Publishing

E-mail: tps.tandfsalesorder@thomson.com 
Composition by Parthenon Publishing
Printed and bound in India by Replika Press Pvt. Ltd.

v
Contents
Foreword – Robert A Rizza
vii
Preface
ix
Acknowledgments
x
1.
Introduction
1
2.
Pathogenesis
9
3.
Treatment
33
4.
Treatment of children and adolescents with diabetes
59
5.
Diabetes and surgery
61
6.
Acute complications of diabetes
63
7.
Chronic complications of diabetes
69
8.
Diabetic dyslipidemia
109
9.
Diabetes and pregnancy
111
10.
Living with diabetes
115
11.
Future developments in diabetes
117
Index
121

vii
Foreword
Diabetes mellitus is likely to become one of the most
prevalent and economically important diseases of the
21st century largely owing to an increasing incidence
of type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM) in the developed
nations and many of the developing nations. Every
physician will encounter a patient who has diabetes.
Multiple factors, both environmental and genetic, con-
tribute to the pathogenesis of the disease. Type 2 DM
is particularly common in obese sedentary popula-
tions, while type 1 DM can have a dramatic onset and
be a major therapeutic challenge.
Rarer conditions such as acromegaly, Cushing’s dis-
ease and hemochromatosis may cause or exacerbate
diabetes. If the hyperglycemia of diabetes is not ade-
quately treated, potentially devastating micro- and
macrovascular complications might ensue. It follows
that all physicians need to be familiar with this condi-
tion and its array of complications and associations.
However, owing to the sheer volume of information

However, owing to the sheer volume of information
related to this area of medicine, it is difficult for the
busy practitioner to keep up to date.
The third edition of Ian Scobie’s Atlas of Diabetes
Mellitus, building on the success of the two previous
editions, goes a long way towards making this task
easier and remains a testimonial to the fact that a pic-
ture is indeed worth at least a thousand words. This
Atlas begins with a brief overview of the diagnosis,
pathogenesis and treatment of diabetes with special
reference to the complications of diabetes and the
treatment of children and adolescents. Specific
chapters cover diabetic dyslipidemia, diabetes and
pregnancy and what it is like to live with this chronic
condition. These, and other sections, set the stage for
the multitude of highly informative illustrations which
follow. Most specialists in diabetes have seen real-life
examples of the disease processes presented in
this book but some may be very unfamiliar to the

examples of the disease processes presented in
this book but some may be very unfamiliar to the
generalist.
For specialists, however, many years of practice are
required to accumulate this experience. How often
does a non-specialist see a patient with Prader–Willi
syndrome, acromegaly or Rabson–Mendenhall syn-
drome? A quick glance at Figures 9, 12 and 18 will help
to imprint the appearances of each of these syndromes.
Many physicians caring for people with type 1 DM
know of autoimmune destruction of the β-cell, but
what exactly does this mean? Figures 27–35 and their
legends take the reader through this topic. What is the
best way to treat patients with type 1 DM? An impor-
tant step is to attempt to reproduce the normal fasting
and post-prandial insulin profiles. How is this done and
what insulin preparations are available to achieve it?
Figures 50–62 provide a step-by-step overview aimed
at helping the practitioner learn, rather than simply
memorize, the requisite information.

at helping the practitioner learn, rather than simply
memorize, the requisite information.
Every patient with diabetes should undergo exam-
ination of the fundus at least once a year by a physi-
cian who is familiar with the manifestations of diabet-
ic retinopathy. This is not always an easy task. How
does one distinguish early background retinopathy
from the more serious high-risk retinopathy? Figures
81–102, to a large extent, constitute a user’s guide to
examination of the diabetic fundus. Similarly, Figures
104–34 show excellent examples of other common
and not-so-common manifestations of diabetic
microvascular and macrovascular complications. A

viii
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
wide array of skin and other manifestations and asso-
ciations of diabetes is demonstrated.
Many excellent and comprehensive textbooks of
diabetes are available, but I am unaware of any
other illustrated text with the scope and breadth of
Dr Scobie’s Atlas of Diabetes Mellitus. I am delight-
ed to write a foreword to the third edition of this
wonderful and successful Atlas and more than delight-
ed to keep my own personal copy. I have no doubt that
both my students and I will continue to find this book
useful for many years to come. I suspect that those of
you who choose to add this excellent Atlas to your
library will find that you will also share my enthusiasm
for this delightful book.
Robert A Rizza, MD
Rochester, MN

ix
Preface
The world is witnessing an increase in new cases of
diabetes, in both the developed and the developing
nations, of near epidemic proportion. This ubiquitous
condition will have an ever-increasing impact on all
aspects of medicine and public health. It follows that
all practicing physicians must seek to gain at least a
basic knowledge and understanding of this important
global health problem that is so closely linked to the
increasing prevalence of obesity.
Diabetes is the paradigm of a condition that neces-
sitates a multidisciplinary approach to its management
and treatment. Primary care physicians, hospital physi-
cians, surgeons, nurses, dieticians, psychologists, podia-
trists and ophthalmologists are all drawn into this
process. In addition, medical students and postgradu-
ate doctors need to learn about diabetes and its pro-
tean manifestations.
The third edition of this book continues to build on
the previous two editions in providing a clinical and

the previous two editions in providing a clinical and
scientific background to the diagnosis, clinical presen-
tations and treatment of diabetes mellitus with a fur-
ther aim of portraying the wide and varied expressions
of diabetes and its complications as an aid to their
more ready recognition in clinical practice. It also aims
to illustrate the breathtaking developments that are
taking place in the field of new therapies for diabetes.
This Atlas should, therefore, be of interest to all those
who are involved in the provision of diabetic health
care and should provide some insight into the fruits of
the explosion of basic science and clinical research
that has been conducted in an attempt to further our
understanding of diabetes and to care better for our
diabetic patients.
Ian N Scobie MD FRCP
Gillingham, Kent

x
Acknowledgments
I wish to extend great thanks to Professor Peter
Sönksen and Dr Clara Lowy formerly of St Thomas’
Hospital, London, UK, who kindly supplied many of
the slides in this Atlas. I am greatly indebted to Dr
Tom Barrie, of The Glasgow Eye Infirmary, Glasgow,
UK, who provided a splendid set of eye slides (Figures
82, 87, 97 and 99–101), Dr Alan Foulis, of The Royal
Infirmary in Glasgow, UK, who supplied some magnif-
icent pathology slides (Figures 23–26, 29–33, 35–39,
41) and Eli Lilly and Company for providing Figures
1–3, 46–49, 51, 54 and 56–60.
I am grateful to the following who also contributed
their slides:
Dr Nick Finer, Luton and Dunstable Hospital, Bed-
fordshire, UK (Figure 8); Professor Ian Campbell, Vic-
toria Hospital, Kirkaldy, Fife, UK (Figures 14 and 106);
Dr Sam Chong, Medway Maritime Hospital, Gilling-
ham, Kent, UK (Figure 17); Drs Angus MacCuish and
John Quin, formerly The Royal Infirmary, Glasgow, UK

John Quin, formerly The Royal Infirmary, Glasgow, UK
(Figure 18); Dr Julian Shield, University of Bristol, UK
(Figure 19); Professor Julia Polak, Royal Postgraduate
Medical School, Hammersmith, London, UK (Figures
27 and 28); Professor GianFranco Bottazzo, previously
The London Hospital Medical College, London, UK
(Figure 34); Dr Gray Smith-Laing (Figures 42, 43 and
45) and Dr Richard Day, formerly of Medway Mar-
itime Hospital, Gillingham, Kent, UK (Figure 44);
Novo Nordisk Pharmaceuticals Limited, Crawley, UK
(Figures 52, 53 and 55); MiniMed, Ashtead, UK (Fig-
ures 62 and 69); MediSense, Maidenhead, UK (Figure
67); CDX Diagnostics, Sunderland, Tyne and Wear,
UK (Figure 68); Dr David Kerr, Royal Bournemouth
Hospital, Dorset, UK (Figures 65, 70–72); Dr William
Campbell, Royal Victorian Eye & Ear Hospital, Mel-
bourne, Australia (Figures 90–92); Professor Stephanie
Amiel, King’s College Hospital, London, UK (Figures
77, 152 and 153); Professor Peter Thomas, Royal Free

77, 152 and 153); Professor Peter Thomas, Royal Free
School of Medicine, Hampstead, London, UK (Figure
104); Mr Grant Fullarton, Gartnavel General Hospital,
Glasgow, UK (Figure 110); Pfizer Limited, Sandwich,
UK (Figures 111–114, 154); Dr Roger Lindley (Figure
115); Dr Brian Ayres, St Thomas’ Hospital, London,
UK (Figures 120 and 121); Dr Kumar Segaran, Med-
way Maritime Hospital, Gillingham, Kent, UK (Figures
122 and 123); Mrs Ali Foster, King’s College Hospital,
London, UK (Figure 124); Mr Mike Green (Figures
125 and 126), Dr Kishore Reddy (Figure 131), Dr Paul
Ryan (Figures 133 and 134), Dr Larry Shall (Figures
136, 140–142, 144) all of Medway Maritime Hospital,
Gillingham, Kent, UK; Dr Peter Watkins, King’s Col-
lege Hospital, London, UK (Figure 149); Mr Harry
Belcher, Queen Victoria Hospital, East Grinstead, Sus-
sex, UK (Figure 150).
Finally, I thank Mrs Daniella James for typing the
text and Mrs Carol Esson and Mrs Elizabeth Cannell
for help with previous editions.

text and Mrs Carol Esson and Mrs Elizabeth Cannell
for help with previous editions.
Ian N Scobie MD FRCP
Gillingham, Kent

1
1
Introduction
Diabetes mellitus (DM) is set to become one of the
world’s biggest health problems owing to the pro-
jected increase in new cases.
The word diabetes means ‘to run through’ or ‘a
siphon’ in Greek and the condition has been recog-
nized since the time of the ancient Egyptians. Mellitus
(from the Latin and Greek roots for ‘honey’) was later
added to the name of this disorder when it became
appreciated that diabetic urine tasted sweet.
The incidence of type 1 diabetes differs enor-
mously between populations (in England and Wales
the incidence rate is between 15 and 19 cases per
100 000 population per year). There seems to be a
slightly higher risk for boys than for girls, at least in
high-risk populations. There are peaks of incidence
before school age and around puberty with the diag-
nosis being made more frequently in winter months.
An epidemic of type 2 DM is occurring throughout
the world, particularly affecting developing countries

the world, particularly affecting developing countries
and migrants from these countries to industrialized
societies. Highest prevalence rates are found in some
native American tribes, notably the Pima Indians in
Arizona (over 50%) and South Pacific groups. Age-
standardized prevalence in the UK is 1–2% for the
white population, 11% for those of Indian origin and
9% for those of African-Caribbean origin. Rates for the
USA are 12–20% for migrant Hispanic groups, 9% for
male black African-Americans, 13% for female black
African-Americans and 3–8% for non-Hispanic white
Americans.
The personal and public health costs of diabetes
are high. It has been estimated that diabetes accounts
for 2.8% of all hospital admissions in some countries.
The cost of diabetes to society in a developed country
may be up to 4.5% of the total health-care costs.
DEFINITION OF DIABETES
DM is a group of metabolic disorders characterized by
hyperglycemia. The hyperglycemia results from

DM is a group of metabolic disorders characterized by
hyperglycemia. The hyperglycemia results from
defects in insulin secretion, insulin action or both. The
chronic hyperglycemia of diabetes is associated with
specific chronic complications resulting in damage to
or failure of various organs, notably the eyes, kidneys,
nerves, heart and blood vessels.
DIAGNOSIS OF DIABETES
The diagnostic criteria for DM have been modified in
recent years by the American Diabetes Association
(ADA) from previous recommendations made by the
National Diabetes Data Group in 1979 and the World
Health Organization (WHO) in 1985. In clinical prac-
tice, establishing the diagnosis of diabetes is seldom a
problem. When symptoms of hyperglycemia exist
(thirst, polyuria, weight loss, etc.) a random plasma
glucose concentration of ≥11.1 mmol/l (200 mg/dl) or
a fasting plasma glucose (FPG) of ≥7.0 mmol/l
(126 mg/dl) confirms the diagnosis. Where diagnostic
difficulty exists, the precise diagnosis can be estab-

difficulty exists, the precise diagnosis can be estab-
lished with an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT)
using a 75 g anhydrous glucose load dissolved in water:
a 2 h value ≥11.1 mmol/l (200 mg/dl) establishes the
diagnosis of diabetes. A confirmatory test using one or

2
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
other of the three methods should be employed. The
OGTT is not recommended for routine clinical use,
but may be an important test for epidemiologic pur-
poses where using the FPG only may lead to lower
prevalence rates than with the combined use of the
FPG and OGTT. The ADA recognizes an intermediate
group of subjects whose FPG is ≥6.1 mmol/l
(110 mg/dl) but < 7.0 mmol/l (126 mg/dl) and has
defined this group as having impaired fasting glucose
(IFG). It has recently been suggested by the ADA that
the FPG level to diagnose IFG should be reduced from
≥6.1 mmol/l (110 mg/dl) to ≥5.6 mmol/l (100 mg/dl).
A further abnormal category is defined as having a
plasma 
glucose 
≥7.8 mmol/l
(140 mg/dl) 
but
< 11.1 mmol/l (200 mg/dl) at 2 h when an OGTT is
used and is described as impaired glucose tolerance
(IGT).
CLASSIFICATION OF DIABETES
The diagnostic label ‘diabetes mellitus’ refers not to a
unique disease but rather to multiple disorders of dif-

unique disease but rather to multiple disorders of dif-
ferent causation. Increasing knowledge has allowed us
to identify discrete conditions caused by specific
genetic abnormalities, while other types of diabetes
remain difficult to classify on an etiologic basis. The
ADA has published a new etiologic classification of
diabetes, an adapted version of which is presented in
Figure 6.
Type 1 diabetes (previously insulin-dependent dia-
betes mellitus (IDDM)) is characterized by β-cell
destruction, usually leading to absolute insulin defi-
ciency and associated with a usually juvenile onset, a
tendency to ketosis and diabetic ketoacidosis, and an
absolute need for insulin treatment. Most patients
have type 1A diabetes, which is caused by a cellular-
mediated autoimmune destruction of the β-cells of the
pancreas, a minority have type 1B diabetes the precise
etiology of which is not known.
Type 2 diabetes (previously non-insulin-dependent

etiology of which is not known.
Type 2 diabetes (previously non-insulin-dependent
diabetes mellitus (NIDDM)) is associated with obesity
and an onset later in life (although cases in childhood
are now being recognized in the USA). Patients, at
least initially and often throughout their lives, do not
have a need for insulin therapy. The disorder manifests
as a result of insulin resistance and relative insulin
deficiency. A precise cause (or causes) has not been
found. This type of diabetes frequently remains
undiagnosed for many years despite affected individu-
als being at risk of developing serious macrovascular or
microvascular complications of the disease. Some
patients may masquerade as type 2 diabetic patients,
but ultimately are recognized as having a late-onset
slowly progressing immune-mediated type 1 diabetes,
so called latent autoimmune diabetes in adults
(LADA).
Specific monogenetic defects of the β-cell have
been identified and usually give rise to maturity-onset

been identified and usually give rise to maturity-onset
diabetes of the young (MODY). MODY is defined as
a genetic defect in β-cell function subclassified accord-
ing to the specific gene involved and is described in
detail in Chapter 2 in the section ‘Other types of dia-
betes’.
Diabetes may result from any process that
adversely affects the pancreas and such acquired
processes include pancreatitis, trauma, pancreatec-
tomy and pancreatic cancer. Usually extensive pancre-
atic damage or removal must occur for diabetes to
emerge. Cystic fibrosis, hemochromatosis and fibrocal-
culous pancreatopathy may also cause diabetes. Dia-
betes may also be caused by other endocrine diseases
particularly when there is over-secretion of hormones
that antagonize the normal effect of insulin (including
Cushing’s syndrome, acromegaly, pheochromocy-
toma). Drugs that have a similar effect (glucocorti-
coids, diazoxide, thiazides) may also cause diabetes.

coids, diazoxide, thiazides) may also cause diabetes.
Diabetes may also occur as a result of certain rare dis-
orders associated with abnormalities of insulin or the
insulin receptor, causing extreme insulin resistance and
sometimes found in association with acanthosis nigri-
cans. These disorders are categorized as insulin resist-
ance syndromes. There is a wide array of other genetic
syndromes sometimes associated with diabetes, e.g.
Down’s, Klinefelter’s, Turner’s syndromes.
Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) is defined as
any degree of glucose intolerance with onset or first
recognition during pregnancy. Care must be taken to
exclude type 2 diabetes that was present before preg-
nancy and type 1 diabetes diagnosed during preg-
nancy. The patient’s glucose tolerance status needs to
be re-classified 6 weeks after giving birth. Deteriora-
tion of glucose tolerance occurs during normal preg-
nancy, especially in the third trimester. The criteria for

nancy, especially in the third trimester. The criteria for
diagnosing abnormal glucose tolerance in pregnancy
have not been agreed worldwide: in the USA the mod-
ified O’Sullivan–Mahan criteria have been adopted,
but these are at variance with the WHO criteria.

3
INTRODUCTION
Patients with GDM are at future risk of developing
type 2 diabetes.
IFG and IGT refer to a pathophysiologic state
between normality and frank diabetes. Patients with
IGT may only manifest as hyperglycemic when chal-
lenged with an oral glucose load. Between 10 and 15%
of IGT patients will develop type 2 diabetes within
5 years, although some may return to normal glucose
tolerance. Although patients with IGT do not nor-
mally develop the microvascular complications of dia-
betes, they commonly display other features of the
insulin resistance syndrome (also known as syndrome
X, the metabolic syndrome or Reaven’s syndrome),
e.g. hypertension and dyslipidemia, and IGT is associ-
ated with a major increase in cardiovascular risk.
EPIDEMIOLOGY OF DIABETES
The epidemiology of type 1 diabetes, a disease of as
yet unknown etiology, is complex. The overall inci-
dence rates are comparable in North America and
Europe; however, this disguises some marked varia-

dence rates are comparable in North America and
Europe; however, this disguises some marked varia-
tions in incidence rates between countries and even
within countries. Within Europe, particularly high
incidence rates are found in Finland, Sweden and Sar-
dinia. Most Asian populations have a low incidence
rate. In general, the incidence of type 1 diabetes seems
to be increasing with an average increase in incidence
of around 3% per year. About half of all cases of type
1 diabetes are diagnosed at an age of < 15 years, with
an observed peak in incidence rates in children aged
10–14 years. More recently, many cases are being diag-
nosed in children of < 5 years of age. In many high-risk
populations a male excess of type 1 diabetes is seen,
especially after the age of puberty.
Cases of type 2 diabetes greatly exceed those of
type 1 diabetes accounting for about 85% of cases in
Europe and significantly more than this in certain
ethnic groups. It is predicted that the total number of

ethnic groups. It is predicted that the total number of
people with diabetes will rise to 300 million, or maybe
more, by 2025 with a preponderance of cases occurr-
ing in the developing world. In many populations
there is a declining age of peak incidence with cases
now being identified in children and young
adolescents, especially in highly susceptible groups
such as Native Americans. In North America, type 2
diabetes is highly prevalent in Native American com-
munities such as the Pima Indians, a feature shared by
the Nauru and Papua New Guinea populations of the
Pacific Islands. US Hispanic, black Americans and
Polynesians also exhibit high prevalence rates. In the
UK, prevalence rates of 3–5% are frequently found
with higher rates observed in the Asian population as
reported also in the Asian subcontinent.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Alberti KGGM. Preventing insulin dependent diabetes mel-
litus. Promising strategies but formidable hurdles still to
clear. Br Med J 1993; 307: 1435–6

litus. Promising strategies but formidable hurdles still to
clear. Br Med J 1993; 307: 1435–6
Alberti KG, Zimmet PZ. Definition, diagnosis and classifica-
tion of diabetes mellitus and its complications. Part I: diagno-
sis and classification of diabetes mellitus provisional report of
a WHO consultation. Diabet Med 1998; 15: 539–53
American Diabetes Association. Type 2 diabetes in children
and adolescents. Diabetes Care 2000; 23: 381–9
Diabetes care and research in Europe: the Saint Vincent dec-
laration. Diabet Med 1990; 7: 360
Eisenbarth GS. Type I diabetes mellitus. A chronic autoim-
mune disease. N Engl J Med 1986; 314: 1360–8
Larsson H, Berglund G, Lindgarde F, Ahren B. Comparison
of ADA and WHO criteria for diagnosis of diabetes and glu-
cose intolerance. Diabetologia 1998; 41: 1124–5
MacFarlane IA. Diabetes mellitus and endocrine disease. In
Pickup J, Williams G, eds. Textbook of Diabetes. Oxford:
Blackwell Scientific Publications, 1991: 263–75

Blackwell Scientific Publications, 1991: 263–75
Report of the Expert Committee on the Diagnosis and Clas-
sification of Diabetes Mellitus. Diabetes Care 1998; 21
(Suppl): s5–19
Zimmet PZ, Tuomi T, Mackay IR, et al. Latent autoimmune
diabetes mellitus in adults (LADA): the role of antibodies to
glutamic acid decarboxylase in diagnosis and prediction of
insulin dependency. Diabet Med 1994; 11: 299–303

4
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
Figure 1
The discovery of insulin in 1922 is accredited to
Frederick Banting and Charles Best (a medical student), seen
above, supervised by JJR MacLeod and assisted by James
Collip. The work was carried out at the University of Toronto
Figure 2
The same child as seen in Figure 2 in 1923 after
insulin treatment became available following its discovery by
the Toronto group. The effect of this new therapy was
‘miraculous’


5
INTRODUCTION
Figure 3
A 3-year-old child with type 1 diabetes mellitus,
photographed in 1922 before insulin treatment was
available. The only treatment then was a ‘starvation’ diet;
patients rarely survived for more than 2 years

6
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
Other specific types
Type 1 diabetes
mellitus (β-cell
destruction, usually
leading to absolute
insulin deficiency)
Immune
mediated
Idiopathic
Uncommon forms of insulin-mediated diabetes,
e.g. 'stiff-man' syndrome, antiinsulin receptor antibodies
Infections, e.g. congenital rubella and cytomegalovirus
Gestational diabetes mellitus
Type 2 diabetes
mellitus (may range
from predominantly
insulin resistance
with relative insulin
deficiency to a
predominantly
secretory defect
with insulin
resistance)
Genetic defects of β-cell function, e.g.
 Chromosome 20, HNF-4α (MODY 1)
 Chromosome 7, glucokinase (MODY 2)
 Chromosome 12, HNF-1α (MODY 3)
 Mitochondrial DNA
Genetic defects in insulin action, e.g.
 Type A insulin resistance
 Leprechaunism
 Rabson–Mendenhall syndrome
 Lipoatrophic diabetes
Diseases of the exocrine pancreas, e.g.
 Pancreatitis
 Trauma/pancreatectomy
 Neoplasia
 Cystic fibrosis
 Hemochromoatosis
 Fibrocalculous pancreatopathy

Trauma/pancreatectomy
 Neoplasia
 Cystic fibrosis
 Hemochromoatosis
 Fibrocalculous pancreatopathy
Endocrinopathies, e.g. acromegaly, Cushing's
syndrome, glucagonoma, pheochromocytoma,
hyperthyroidism and somatostatinoma
Drug- or chemical-induced diabetes, e.g. glucocorticoids,
diazoxide, β-adrenergic agonists and thiazides
Other genetic syndromes associated with diabetes,
e.g. Down's, Klinefelter's, Turner's, Lawrence–Moon–Biedl
and Prader–Willi syndromes, Friedreich's
ataxia and myotonic dystrophy
American Diabetes Association
etiologic classification of diabetes mellitus
Figure 6
The American Diabetes Association has proposed an etiologic classification of diabetes based on research findings
over the past two decades. The nomenclature has changed from insulin-dependent diabetes to type 1 diabetes and from non-
insulin diabetes mellitus to type 2 diabetes. All forms of diabetes are characterized according to their known etiologies,

immunologic, genetic or otherwise. This opens up the concept of ‘the diabetic syndrome’. HNF, hepatic nuclear factor; MODY,
maturity-onset diabetes of the young

7
INTRODUCTION
Symptoms of diabetes plus random plasma glucose concentration of ≥ 11.1 mmol/l
Fasting plasma glucose concentration of ≥ 7.0 mmol/l
or
or
Plasma glucose concentration at 2 h ≥ 11.1 mmol/l during a 75 g oral glucose tolerance test
(in the absence of unequivocal hyperglycemia or symptoms, the diagnosis should be
confirmed by repeat testing on a different day)
Diagnosis of diabetes mellitus positive if:
Figure 7
Although a definitive diagnosis of diabetes may be made using the glucose tolerance test, it is no longer
recommended for routine clinical use. In the presence of diabetic symptoms, the diagnosis may be established by finding a
random plasma glucose level of ≥11.1 mmol/l (200 mg/dl) or a fasting plasma glucose level of ≥7.0 mmol/l (126 mg/dl) . Both
impaired fasting glucose and impaired glucose tolerance are defined in the text

9
2
Pathogenesis
TYPE 1 DIABETES MELLITUS
Type 1 diabetes mellitus (DM) is a disease of multi-
factorial autoimmune causation. Worldwide, there is a
marked geographic variation in prevalence. The overall
lifetime risk in Caucasian subjects is approximately
0–4%. Type 1 DM is caused by an interaction between
environmental factors and an inherited genetic predis-
position. In twin studies, a significant genetic contri-
bution is suggested by a concordance value for type 1
DM of 30–50%. The risk to a first-degree relative is
approximately 5%. The high discordance rate supports
the notion that type 1 DM is multifactorial in etiology.
Environmental triggers may account for up to two-
thirds of the disease susceptibility.
About 20 different regions of the human genome
have been found to have some degree of linkage with
type 1 DM. To date, the strongest linkage has been
with genes encoded in the human leukocyte antigen
(HLA) region located within the major histocompati-

(HLA) region located within the major histocompati-
bility complex (MHC), the contribution of which to
disease risk is now designated IDDM1. This appears to
be the most powerful determinant of genetic suscepti-
bility to the disease, accounting for approximately
40% of familial inheritance. More than 90% of patients
who develop type 1 DM have either DR3, DQ2 or
DR4, DQγ haplotypes, whereas fewer than 40% of
normal controls have these haplotypes. DR3-DR4
heterozygosity is highest in children who develop dia-
betes before the age of 5 years (50%) and lowest in
adults presenting with type 1 diabetes (20–30%) com-
pared with an overall US population prevalence of
2.4%. Specific polymorphisms of the DQB1 gene
encoding the β-chain of class II DQ molecules predis-
pose to diabetes in Caucasians but not in Japanese. In
contrast, the HLS-DQ6 molecule protects against the
disease. HLA antigens (classes I and II) are cell-surface
glycoproteins that play a crucial role in presenting

glycoproteins that play a crucial role in presenting
autoantigen peptide fragments to T lymphocytes and
thus initiating an immune response. Polymorphisms in
the genes encoding specific peptide chains of the HLA
molecules may therefore modulate the ability of
β-cell-derived antigens to trigger an autoimmune
response against the β-cell.
Only one non-HLA gene has been identified with
certainty and that is the insulin gene (INS) region on
chromosome 11p5.5, now designated IDDM2. Popu-
lation studies of Caucasian type 1 diabetic subjects
and non-diabetic controls initially showed a positive
association between alleles within the INS region and
disease susceptibility. However, recent genome screens
have provided conflicting data regarding the role of
the INS gene region (IDDM2). It is thought that INS
and HLA act independently in the causation of type 1
diabetes and that the INS gene region (IDDM2)
accounts for 10% of familial clustering.
The most likely environmental factor implicated in

accounts for 10% of familial clustering.
The most likely environmental factor implicated in
the causation of type 1 DM is viral infection. Numer-
ous viruses attack the pancreatic β-cell either directly
through a cytolytic effect or by triggering an autoim-
mune attack against the β-cell. Evidence for a viral fac-
tor in etiology has come from animal models and, in
humans, from observation of seasonal and geographic
variations in the onset of the disease. In addition,
patients newly presenting with type 1 DM may
exhibit serologic evidence of viral infection. Viruses

10
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
that have been linked to human type 1 DM include
mumps, Coxsackie B, retroviruses, rubella, cyto-
megalovirus and Epstein–Barr virus. Bovine serum
albumin, a major constituent of cow’s milk, has been
implicated as a cause of type 1 DM in children
exposed at an early age, but definitive proof is lacking
and this remains controversial. Nitrosamines (found in
smoked and cured meats) may be diabetogenic as may
chemicals known to be toxic to pancreatic β-cells,
including alloxan, streptozotocin and the rat poison
Vacor. Recent reports suggesting that early ingestion of
cereal or gluten increases the risk of type 1 diabetes
remain to be confirmed.
Type 1 DM is associated with autoimmune
destruction of the β-cells of the endocrine pancreas.
Examination of islet tissue obtained from pancreatic
biopsy or at postmortem from patients with recent-
onset type 1 DM confirms a mononuclear cell infil-
trate (termed insulitis) with the presence of CD4 and

trate (termed insulitis) with the presence of CD4 and
CD8 T lymphocytes, B lymphocytes and macrophages
suggesting that these cells have a role in the destruc-
tion of β-cells. Although the precise mechanism of
such an insult has not been elucidated it seems likely
that an environmental factor, such as a viral infection,
in a subject with an inherited predisposition to the
disease, triggers the damaging immune response. This
results in aberrant expression of class II MHC antigen
by pancreatic β-cells. T lymphocytes recognize
antigen-presenting cells and are activated, producing
cytokines such as interleukin (IL)-2, interferon (IFN)γ
and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α. This generates a
clone of T lymphocytes that carry receptors specific to
the presented antigen. Such T-helper cells assist B lym-
phocytes to produce antibodies directed against the
β-cell. Such antibodies include islet cell antibodies
(ICA) directed against cytoplasmic components of the

(ICA) directed against cytoplasmic components of the
islet cells. ICA presence may precede the development
of type 1 DM. Some subjects may develop ICA tem-
porarily and not go on to develop the disease, but per-
sistence of ICA leads to progressive β-cell destruction
associated with the chronic inflammatory cell infiltrate
termed ‘insulitis’. Type 1 DM ensues. Other antibodies
associated with type 1 DM are islet cell-surface anti-
bodies (present in 30–60% of newly diagnosed type 1
DM patients), insulin autoantibodies (IAA) and anti-
bodies to an isoform of glutamic acid decarboxylase
(GAD).
TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Type 2 DM is one of the most commonly seen genetic
disorders, yet its exact mode of inheritance has
remained elusive and is likely to be polygenic. The rate
of concordance is high in identical twins, but is much
lower in non-identical dizygotic twins. Patients with
type 2 DM show an increased frequency of diabetes
in other family members compared with the non-

type 2 DM show an increased frequency of diabetes
in other family members compared with the non-
diabetic population. Only a small proportion of
patients (< 3%) with type 2 DM have a monogenic dis-
order. No unequivocal, reproducible associations with
type 2 diabetes have been found for candidate genes
studied so far. Furthermore, no genome scans in type 2
DM have identified any region with an effect as large
as the HLA region in type 1 DM.
It has long been recognized that the hyperglycemia
of type 2 DM results from a defect in both insulin
secretion and insulin action
Pathogenesis of type 2 DM
Subjects with type 2 DM exhibit abnormalities in glu-
cose homeostasis owing to impaired insulin secretion,
insulin resistance in muscle, liver and adipocytes and
abnormalities of splanchnic glucose uptake.
Insulin secretion in type 2 DM
Impaired insulin secretion is a universal finding in
patients with type 2 diabetes. In the early stages of
type 2 DM insulin resistance can be compensated for

type 2 DM insulin resistance can be compensated for
by an increase in insulin secretion leading to normal
glucose tolerance. With increasing insulin resistance,
the fasting plasma glucose will rise, accompanied by an
increase in fasting plasma insulin levels, until a fasting
plasma glucose level is reached when the β-cell is
unable to maintain its elevated rate of insulin secretion
at which point the fasting plasma insulin declines
sharply. Hepatic glucose production will begin to rise.
When fasting plasma glucose reaches high levels, the
plasma insulin response to a glucose challenge is
markedly blunted. Although fasting insulin levels
remain elevated, postprandial insulin and C-peptide
secretory rates are decreased. This natural history of
type 2 diabetes starting from normal glucose toler-
ance, followed by insulin resistance, compensatory

11
PATHOGENESIS
hyperinsulinemia and then by progression to impaired
glucose tolerance and overt diabetes has been docu-
mented in a variety of populations.
Type 2 DM is characterized by loss of the first-
phase insulin response to an intravenous glucose load,
although this abnormality may be acquired secondary
to glucotoxicity. Loss of the first-phase insulin
response is important as this early quick insulin secre-
tion primes insulin target tissues, especially the liver.
There may be multiple possible causes of the
impaired insulin secretion in type 2 DM with several
abnormalities having been shown to disturb the deli-
cate balance between islet neogenesis and apoptosis.
Studies in first-degree relatives of patients with type 2
diabetes and in twins have provided strong evidence
for the genetic basis of abnormal β-cell function.
Acquired defects in type 2 diabetes may lead to
impairment of insulin secretion. Clinical studies in
man, and animal studies, have supported the concept

man, and animal studies, have supported the concept
of glucotoxicity, whereby an elevation in plasma glu-
cose levels, in the presence of a reduced β-cell mass,
can lead to a major impairment in insulin secretion.
Lipotoxicity has also been implicated as an acquired
cause of impaired β-cell function. Patients with type 2
DM exhibit a reduced response of the incretin
glucagon-like peptide (GLP)-1 in response to oral glu-
cose, while GLP-1 administration enhances the post-
prandial insulin secretory response and may restore
near-normal glycemia.
Amyloid deposits (islet amyloid polypeptide
(IAPP)) or amylin in the pancreas are frequently
observed in patients with type 2 diabetes and have
been implicated as a cause of progressive β-cell failure.
However, definitive evidence that amylin contributes
to β-cell dysfunction in humans is lacking.
Insulin resistance in type 2 DM
Insulin resistance is a characteristic feature of both
lean and obese individuals with type 2 diabetes. As

lean and obese individuals with type 2 diabetes. As
indicated above, in the fasting state, plasma insulin lev-
els are increased in patients with type 2 diabetes. Since
hyperinsulinemia is a potent inhibitor of hepatic
glucose production and an excessive rate of hepatic
glucose production is the major abnormality responsi-
ble for the elevated fasting plasma glucose in type 2
diabetes, it follows that there must be hepatic resist-
ance to the action of insulin. The liver is also resistant
to the inhibitory effect of hyperglycemia on hepatic
glucose output. Most of the increase in hepatic glucose
production can be accounted for by an increase in
hepatic gluconeogenesis.
Muscle is the major site of insulin-stimulated glu-
cose disposal in humans. Muscle represents the pri-
mary site of insulin resistance in type 2 diabetic sub-
jects leading to a marked blunting of glucose uptake
into peripheral muscle. In contrast, splanchnic tissues,

into peripheral muscle. In contrast, splanchnic tissues,
like the brain, are relatively insensitive to insulin with
respect to stimulation of glucose uptake. Following
glucose ingestion both impaired suppression of
hepatic glucose production and decreased muscle glu-
cose uptake are responsible for the observed glucose
intolerance leading to hyperglycemia.
There is a dynamic relationship between insulin
resistance and impaired insulin secretion. Insulin
resistance is an early and characteristic feature of type
2 diabetes in high-risk populations. Overt diabetes
develops only when the β-cells are unable to increase
sufficiently their insulin output to compensate for the
defect in insulin action (insulin resistance).
Insulin resistance in type 2 diabetes is primarily
due to post-binding defects in insulin action. Dimin-
ished insulin binding is modest and secondary to
down-regulation of the insulin receptor by chronic
hyperglycemia. Post-binding defects that have been

hyperglycemia. Post-binding defects that have been
recognized include reduced insulin receptor tyrosine
kinase activity, insulin signal transduction abnormali-
ties, decreased glucose transport, diminished glucose
phosphorylation and impaired glycogen synthase
activity. Quantitatively, impaired glycogen synthesis
represents the major abnormality responsible for
insulin resistance in type 2 diabetic patients.
OTHER TYPES OF DIABETES
Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is
inherited as an autosomal dominant and, to date,
abnormalities at six genetic loci on different chromo-
somes have been identified. The most common form
of MODY is associated with mutations on chromo-
some 12 in hepatic nuclear factor (HNF)-1α and
hence this is referred to as transcription-factor MODY.
Other mutations affect such transcription factors as
HNF-1β, HNF-4α, insulin promoter factor-1 and
NEUROD 1. Transcription factor mutations alter
insulin secretion in the mature β-cell as well as alter-

insulin secretion in the mature β-cell as well as alter-
ing β-cell development, proliferation and cell death.

12
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
Glucose tolerance is normal at birth, but progressive β-
cell dysfunction ensues until the emergence of frank
diabetes. Patients with transcription-factor mutations
tend to be lean and insulin-sensitive rather than obese
and insulin-resistant. Microvascular complications are
frequent.
The first gene implicated in MODY was the glu-
cokinase gene. Mutations on the glucokinase gene on
chromosome 7p result in a defective glucokinase mol-
ecule. As glucokinase converts glucose to glucose-6-
phosphate, the metabolism of which stimulates insulin
secretion by the β-cell, glucokinase serves as a ‘glucose
sensor’. With defects in the glucokinase gene,
increased plasma levels of glucose are necessary to
elicit normal levels of insulin secretion. Over 100 glu-
cokinase gene mutations have now been found in fam-
ilies from several different countries. Fasting hyper-
glycemia is present from birth and worsens very slowly

glycemia is present from birth and worsens very slowly
with age. Subjects are usually detected by screening,
e.g. in pregnancy or during coincidental illness or by
family studies. The mild hyperglycemia of this type of
MODY rarely needs any treatment other than diet,
and microvascular complications are rare.
Other specific genetic defects leading to diabetes
include point mutations in mitochondrial DNA,
genetic abnormalities leading to the inability to con-
vert proinsulin to insulin and to the production of
mutant insulin molecules and mutations of the insulin
receptor.
As previously described, diabetes may result from
overt diseases of the exocrine pancreas, secondary to
specific endocrinopathies and due to drugs or chemi-
cals. Certain viruses have been associated with β-cell
destruction (Coxsackievirus B, cytomegalovirus, aden-
ovirus, mumps, congenital rubella), although in most
cases the precise nature of the association remains
unclear. Many other genetic syndromes are accompa-

unclear. Many other genetic syndromes are accompa-
nied by an increased incidence of diabetes (Down’s
syndrome, Klinefelter’s syndrome, Turner’s syndrome,
Wolfram’s syndrome).
THE OBESITY EPIDEMIC
A dramatic increase in the prevalence of obesity has
been witnessed in many countries in the past quarter
of a century. Obesity, at least in Caucasian popula-
tions, is defined as a body mass index (BMI; weight
(kg)/height (m)2) over 30 (a lower level has been sug-
gested for some ethnic groups.) BMI may not accu-
rately reflect fat mass nor its distribution. Fairly accu-
rate estimations of fat distribution may be gained by
measuring the waist–hip ratio or more simply waist
circumference, both of which correlate well with more
sophisticated techniques, such as computed tomogra-
phy or magnetic resonance imaging. The measurement
of waist circumference has become part of the defini-
tion of the metabolic syndrome or syndrome X, a con-
dition that predisposes to the development of type 2

dition that predisposes to the development of type 2
diabetes. Since 1980 the prevalence of obesity in the
UK has risen from 6% in men and 8% in women to
19% in men and 21% in women in 1999 and since
then it has risen still further. In the USA, the preva-
lence of obesity has increased between the period
1976–1980 and the period 1999–2000 by 110% such
that 65% of the adult population is overweight or
obese. Perhaps even more worrying, there has been an
alarming increase in weight in children and teenagers
in the USA, with more than 10% of 2–5-year olds and
15% of 6–19-year olds being overweight as defined as
a BMI ≥95th centile for age and gender. Prevalence
rates of obesity have increased more in minority
groups as compared with white groups, but people of
all ages, races, ethnicities, socioeconomic levels and
geographic areas are experiencing a substantial
increase in weight. Such data have led to the coining
of the term the obesity epidemic, sometimes stated as

of the term the obesity epidemic, sometimes stated as
the obesity pandemic, as this problem is not confined
to the developed nations of the world but is also hap-
pening in developing nations, particularly in affluent
strata of society.
Food intake
It is clear that obesity results from the interaction of
many factors including genetic, metabolic, behavioral
and environmental influences, but the rapidity with
which obesity is increasing, in the context of a rela-
tively stable gene pool, suggests that environmental
and behavioral factors largely explain the epidemic.
National trends in food consumption have revealed
conflicting data; however, ecologic data seem to sup-
port the notion that energy intake has increased per-
haps related to an increased percentage of food con-
sumed outside the home including fast foods, greater
consumption of soft drinks and larger portion sizes.

13
PATHOGENESIS
Energy expenditure
Although it is difficult to quantify, it seems likely that
a major downward change in physical activity, and
thus energy expenditure, plays a significant role in the
development of obesity in modern society whether or
not energy intake has increased. This includes the level
of activity required at work and in the home, reduced
dependence on walking and cycling for transportation,
reduced physical activity in schools and more jobs
being of a sedentary nature. Of the US population
60% do not participate in regular physical activity and
25% are almost entirely sedentary. Almost half of
young Americans are not vigorously active on a rou-
tine basis. A cross-sectional study in South Carolina
suggested that obese children spent less time in mod-
erate and vigorous physical activity than their non-
obese counterparts, and in a national US study, chil-
dren who engaged in the least vigorous physical
activity or the most television viewing tended to be

activity or the most television viewing tended to be
the most overweight.
Sequelae of obesity
Obesity is associated with an increased risk of heart
disease, hypertension, a variety of cancers, cerebrovas-
cular disease, gallstones and osteoarthritis; furthermore
it has also been associated with an alarming increase in
the prevalence of type 2 diabetes with adults present-
ing at an ever earlier age and the disturbing appear-
ance of type 2 diabetes in adolescents and even chil-
dren. The health and economic consequences of this
are likely to be devastating, thus the obesity epidemic
has to be considered a global issue of major impor-
tance. Governments and their politicians must address
this issue and develop workable public health policies
and legislation to reverse the obesity trend.
PREVENTION OF DIABETES
Type 1 diabetes
The National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and
Kidney Diseases (NIDDK) in the USA has set up the
type 1 Diabetes Trial Net, a clinical trials network that

type 1 Diabetes Trial Net, a clinical trials network that
will explore new treatments in patients with newly
presenting diabetes, in family members at risk of
developing type 1 diabetes and, possibly, also in people
who are at high genetic risk. At present no such ther-
apy has proven to be effective or clinically safe. On the
basis of the theory that immune-mediated type 1 dia-
betes is believed to result from immunologic destruc-
tion of islet β-cells as a consequence of an interplay
between genetic susceptibility and a triggering envi-
ronmental agent or agents, it would seem possible to
identify potential targets for prevention of the disease,
although we know that the above theory is very much
an over-simplification of the true pathological mecha-
nism. The development of type 1 diabetes is a slow
process with the best prospect of preventive strategies
being early in the disease process. At that stage, disease
prediction is less accurate and any treatment would

prediction is less accurate and any treatment would
need to be safe and harmless, otherwise individuals
may come to harm with treatment who were never
going to develop the disease. No such agent yet exists.
Strategies to prevent type 1 diabetes would include
(a) identification and elimination of environmental
triggers, (b) identification and promotion of environ-
mental protective factors and (c) interruption of the
immunologic process leading to β-cell destruction.
Several trials have demonstrated that immunosup-
pressive agents can slow or interrupt the disease
process, but concern remains about long-term toxicity.
Studies with newer agents (e.g. sirolimus, mycopheno-
late, etc.) have been initiated. Early studies with
anti-CD3 monoclonal antibodies have suggested a
beneficial effect on preservation of β-cell function.
Nicotinamide has been suggested as a means of pro-
tecting β-cells; however, unfortunately a large scale
trial (ENDIT: the European Nicotinamide Diabetes

trial (ENDIT: the European Nicotinamide Diabetes
Intervention Trial) showed no significant benefit.
Expansion of β-cell mass (with exendin, GLP-1 or islet
neogenesis-associated protein) is a possible research
consideration. Rest of β-cells (with insulin therapy) in
early-onset diabetes or ICA-positive relatives has not
yet shown conclusively that it delays or prevents the
development of type 1 diabetes. More recently several
groups have made progress towards the development
of a vaccine to prevent the onset of type 1 diabetes.
Type 2 diabetes
Given the expanding prevalence rates of type 2 dia-
betes both in developed and developing nations, the
prevention of type 2 diabetes assumes global impor-
tance. Clearly the prevention of type 2 diabetes is
incestuously related to the prevention of obesity. Type

14
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
2 diabetes lends itself to potential preventative action
because of the long delay between development of the
earliest metabolic defects and full expression of the
disease. Lifestyle modification or pharmacologic inter-
vention that can improve insulin sensitivity (reduce
insulin resistance) or improve or preserve β-cell func-
tion would expect to have an impact on the future
development of type 2 diabetes.
The first major trial to show the effect of lifestyle
change on the development of diabetes was the Da
Qing Study in China where patients with impaired
glucose tolerance (IGT) were randomized to a control
group and one of three active treatment groups
(change in diet, exercise or change in diet plus exer-
cise). The diet group experienced a relative risk reduc-
tion of progression to frank diabetes of 31%, the exer-
cise group of 46% and the combined group of 42%.
This study was followed by the Finnish Diabetes

cise group of 46% and the combined group of 42%.
This study was followed by the Finnish Diabetes
Prevention Study which compared lifestyle interven-
tion to a control group in overweight patients with
IGT. The lifestyle intervention group received detailed
dietary advice and individualized advice on physical
activity with supervized training sessions. During the
first year of the study, the intervention group achieved
a significant loss of 4.2 kg with minimal change in the
control group and after 2 years, the cumulative inci-
dence of progression to diabetes was reduced by 58%.
Whether such an intensity of lifestyle intervention
could be provided, funded and adhered to outside the
context of a clinical trial remains open to debate.
In the USA, the investigators in the Diabetes Pre-
vention Program randomly assigned patients with IGT
to one of three arms: placebo, lifestyle modification or
metformin (850 mg twice daily). Patients in the

metformin (850 mg twice daily). Patients in the
lifestyle intervention group were asked to achieve and
maintain a reduction of at least 7% in body weight
through a healthy diet and to engage in moderate
physical activity for at least 150 min per week. Patients
received intensive support and, as for the Finnish
study, such a level of support is unlikely to be available
in routine clinical practice. The lifestyle group
achieved a greater weight loss (5.6 kg) and a greater
increase in physical activity than the other groups. At
3 years, the prevalence of type 2 diabetes was reduced
by 58% with lifestyle change and by 31% in the met-
formin group.
The multinational STOP-NIDDM Trial (The Study
to Prevent Non-Insulin Dependent Diabetes) used
acarbose to prevent progression to diabetes in IGT
subjects. Patients who were randomized to acarbose
were 25% less likely to develop diabetes and when the
data were corrected to the revised ADA criteria for the

data were corrected to the revised ADA criteria for the
diagnosis of diabetes, there was an even greater relative
risk reduction of 32%. Treatment with a glitazone has
also been shown to reduce the number of patients
who develop diabetes 30 months after gestational dia-
betes with a 55% relative risk reduction in the TRI-
POD study (Troglitazone in Prevention of Diabetes
Study).
Several other type 2 diabetes pharmacologic pre-
vention trials are currently being conducted (NAVI-
GATOR – nateglinide and valsartan, DREAM –
ramipril and rosiglitazone, ACT NOW – pioglitazone
and ORIGIN – insulin glargine) and their outcome is
awaited with interest.
Thus, it has been conclusively shown that lifestyle
modification and drug therapy can delay the onset of
type 2 diabetes. Whether there has been true ‘preven-
tion’ in those subjects who did not develop diabetes is
a different matter. Cost-effective analyses have not
been conducted, although individual health benefit is
likely to ensue.

been conducted, although individual health benefit is
likely to ensue.
The American Diabetes Association Working
Group on the Prevention of Diabetes recommends a
lifestyle intervention strategy for patients with IFG
(impaired fasting glucose) or IGT but does not recom-
mend routine prescription of drug therapy until more
is known about the cost-effectiveness of such a policy.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Andersen RE, Crespo CJ, Bartlett SJ, et al. Relationship of
physical activity and television watching with body weight
and level of fatness among children: results from the Third
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. JAMA
1998; 279: 938–42
Atkinson MA, Eisenbarth GS. Type I diabetes: new perspec-
tives on disease pathogenesis and treatment. Lancet 2001;
358: 221–9
Bottazzo GF. Death of a beta cell: homicide or suicide? Dia-
betic Med 1986; 3: 119–30
Chiasson JL, Gomis R, Hanefeld M, et al. The STOP-
NIDDM Trial: an international study on the efficacy of an

NIDDM Trial: an international study on the efficacy of an
alpha-glucosidase inhibitor to prevent type 2 diabetes in a
population with impaired glucose tolerance: rationale,
design, and preliminary screening data. Study to Prevent
Non-Insulin-Dependent Diabetes Mellitus. Diabetes Care
1998; 21: 1720–5

15
PATHOGENESIS
DeFronzo R. The triumvirate: β-cell, muscle, liver. A collu-
sion responsible for NIDDM. Diabetes 1988; 37: 667–75
DeFronzo RA. Pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes mellitus. Med
Clin North Am 2004; 88: 787–835
Devendra D, Liu E, Eisenbarth GS. Type 1 diabetes: recent
developments. Br Med J 2004; 328: 750–4
Ebbeling CB, Pawiak DB, Ludwig DS. Childhood obesity:
public-health crisis, common sense cure. Lancet 2002; 360:
473–82
Froguel P, Velho G. Genetic determinants of type 2 diabetes.
Recent Prog Horm Res 2001; 56: 91–105
Fujimoto WY. The importance of insulin resistance in the
pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes mellitus. Am J Med 2000;
108 (Suppl 6a): 9s–14s
Hitman GA. The major histocompatibility complex and
insulin dependent (type I) diabetes. Autoimmunity 1989; 4:
119–30
Inzucchi SE, Sherwin RS. The prevention of type 2 diabetes
mellitus. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 2005; 34:
199–219
Kahn SE. The importance of the beta-cell in the pathogene-

199–219
Kahn SE. The importance of the beta-cell in the pathogene-
sis of type 2 diabetes mellitus. Am J Med 2000; 108 (Suppl
6a): 2s–8s
Redondo MJ, Fain PR, Eisenbarth GS. Genetics of type IA
diabetes. Recent Prog Horm Res 2001; 56: 69–89
Skyler JS. Immunotherapy for interdicting the type 1 dia-
betes disease process. In Pickup J, Williams G, eds. Textbook
of Diabetes, 3rd edn. Oxford: Blackwell Scientific Publica-
tions, 2003: 74.1–74.12
Stein CJ, Colditz GA. The epidemic of obesity. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 2004; 89: 2522–5
Szopa TM, Titchener PA, Portwood ND, Taylor KW. Dia-
betes mellitus due to viruses – some recent developments.
Diabetologia 1993; 36: 687–95
Trost SG, Kerr LM, Ward DS, Pate RR. Physical activity and
determinates of physical activity in obese and non-obese
children. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord 2001; 25: 822–9
Undlien DE, Lie BA,Thorsby E. HLA complex genes in type
I diabetes and other autoimmune diseases. Which genes are
involved? Trends Genet 2001; 17: 93–100

I diabetes and other autoimmune diseases. Which genes are
involved? Trends Genet 2001; 17: 93–100
Zimmet PZ. The pathogenesis and prevention of diabetes in
adults. Genes, autoimmunity, and demography. Diabetes
Care 1995; 18: 1050–64

16
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
Figure 9
Prader–Willi syndrome is a syndrome of obesity,
muscular hypotonia, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and
mental retardation associated, in around 50% of cases, with
a deletion or translocation of chromosome 15. A small
percentage of patients have type 2 diabetes mellitus
Figure 8
Type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM) is strongly
associated with obesity and this link has been recognized for
centuries. The risk of developing type 2 DM increases
progressively with rising body mass index. Type 2 DM is the
result of increased insulin resistance and insulin deficiency.
Obesity is strongly associated with insulin resistance and
high fasting insulin levels. It has been proposed that this may
ultimately result in β-cell failure and the emergence of type
2 DM; however, this theory is oversimplistic and the precise
cause of type 2 DM remains unknown except in a few cases
of identified genetic abnormalities

17
PATHOGENESIS
Figure 10
The centripetal obesity and prominent lipid
striae suggest that this is Cushing’s syndrome and not simple
obesity
Figure 11
This young woman (same patient as in Figure
10) has the typical facies of Cushing’s syndrome – a rounded
plethoric face and mild hirsutism. Glucose tolerance is
impaired in most patients with Cushing’s syndrome and
around 25% of patients are diabetic. However, many older
patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus have features of
Cushing’s syndrome, specifically, obesity, hirsutism, hyper-
tension, striae and diabetes, but do not have the condition

18
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
Figure 13
About 10% of patients with Addison’s disease
have diabetes, usually type 1. Diabetic patients who develop
Addison’s disease exhibit an increased sensitivity to insulin
which is reversed by glucocorticoid replacement therapy.
Addison’s disease and associated type 1 DM or other
autoimmune endocrinopathy (such as hypothyroidism,
Graves’ disease, hypoparathyroidism) is referred to as
Schmidt’s syndrome
Figure 12
Diabetes occurs in 15–30% of patients with
acromegaly and similarly with impaired glucose tolerance.
The excess growth hormone secretion, usually from a
pituitary adenoma, is associated with insulin resistance
which, after several years, may result in the diabetic state.The
diabetes is usually type 2, and is associated with the usual
microvascular and other complications. Glucose tolerance
improves after successful treatment of the acromegaly

19
PATHOGENESIS
Figure 14
This patient has hereditary hemochromatosis
transmitted by an autosomal recessive gene. It occurs most
commonly as a result of a mutation in a gene HFE – on the
short arm of chromosome 6. Patients present with the classic
triad of bronze skin pigmentation, hepatomegaly and
diabetes mellitus (hence the term ‘bronze diabetes’).
Cardiac manifestations and pituitary dysfunction also occur
Figure 15
Of the patients who have Klinefelter’s
syndrome (47,XXY karyotype), 26% show diabetes on the
oral glucose tolerance test, but overt symptomatic diabetes is
unusual. The cause of the diabetes is not known, but may be
related to insulin resistance

20
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
Figure 17
The typical facies of myotonic dystrophy, with
frontal balding and a smooth forehead, is associated, albeit
rarely, with diabetes mellitus. Impaired glucose tolerance
with insulin resistance is more commonly found
Figure 16
Diabetes is present in around 60% of young
adults with Turner’s syndrome (45,XO karyotype) and is
usually type 2. A paradoxic rise in growth hormone to oral
glucose may be the cause of the glucose intolerance

21
PATHOGENESIS
Figure 18
This 13-year-old boy with Rabson–Mendenhall
syndrome exhibits severe insulin resistance (moderate
hyperglycemia associated with gross elevation of plasma
insulin levels). Typically associated features include stunted
growth and acanthosis nigricans, affecting the neck, axillae
and antecubital fossae, and a characteristic facies
Figure 19
This young child has morbid obesity. As the age
of peak incidence of diabetes declines, cases of type 2
diabetes are now being identified in such children and in
young adolescents, especially in highly susceptible ethnic
groups. The health consequences of this phenomenon are
likely to be immense

22
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
Gluconeogenesis
The principal substrates
for gluconeogenesis
Amino acids – alanine and glutamine
(from muscle protein)
Lactate and pyruvate (carbon
skeletons derived from glucose,
or Cori, cycle)
Glycerol (from hydrolysis of triglycerides
derived from adipose tissue)
Glycogenolysis
Mechanisms of glucose production
Figure 20
Glucose is produced in the liver by the process of gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis. The main substrates for
gluconeogenesis are the glucogenic amino acids (alanine and glutamine), glycerol, lactate and pyruvate. Many factors influence
the rate of gluconeogenesis; it is suppressed by insulin and stimulated by the sympathetic nervous system. Glycogenolysis (the
breakdown of hepatic glycogen to release glucose) is stimulated by glucagon and catecholamines, but is inhibited by insulin
Time
Glucose stimulation
2nd phase
1st phase
Basal
Insulin secretion rate
Figure 21

Time
Glucose stimulation
2nd phase
1st phase
Basal
Insulin secretion rate
Figure 21
Biphasic insulin response to a constant glucose stimulus: when the β-cell is stimulated, there is a rapid first-phase
insulin response 1–3 min after the glucose level is increased; this returns towards baseline 6–10 min later. Thereafter, there is a
gradual second-phase insulin response that persists for the duration of the stimulus. Type 2 diabetes mellitus is characterized by
loss of the first-phase insulin response and a diminished second-phase response

23
1.
↑  Glycogenolysis
↑  Gluconeogenesis
2.
↑  Proteolysis
3.
↑  Lipolysis
4.
↑  Ketogenesis
The biochemical consequences of insulin deficiency
Liver
Muscle
Adipose
tissue
Liver
↑  Glucose
Osmotic diuresis
Dehydration
↑  Amino acids
↑  Glycerol
↑  Free fatty acids
↑  3-Hydroxybutyrate
↑  Acetoacetate
Metabolic
acidemia
glucogenic
ketogenic
Figure 22
Insulin deficiency results in increased hepatic glucose production and, hence, hyperglycemia by increased
gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis. Insulin deficiency also results in increased proteolysis releasing both glucogenic and
ketogenic amino acids. Lipolysis is increased, elevating both glycerol and non-esterified fatty acid levels which further contribute
to gluconeogenesis and ketogenesis, respectively. The end result is hyperglycemia, dehydration, breakdown of body fat and
protein, and acidemia
PATHOGENESIS

24
Figure 23
Constituents of normal pancreas, medium-power view: to the left lies an excretory duct and, to the right, there is
an islet surrounded by exocrine acinar cells. Hematoxylin and eosin stain
Figure 24
Normal islet immunostained for insulin. The
majority (80%) of the endocrine cells are β-cells
Figure 25
Normal islet immunostained for glucagon. Note
that the α-cells mark the periphery of blocks of endocrine
cells within the islet. Most of the cells within these blocks
are β-cells
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS

25
Figure 26
Normal islet immunostained for somatostatin.
Somatostatin is contained in the D cells which are scattered
within the islet. Somatostatin has an extremely wide range of
actions. It inhibits the secretion of insulin, growth hormone
and glucagon and also suppresses the release of various gut
peptides. Somatostatinomas (D cell tumors) cause weight
loss, malabsorption, gallstones, hypochlorhydria and diabetes
Figure 27
Electron micrograph (EM) of an islet of
Langerhans from a normal pancreas showing mainly insulin
storage granules in a pancreatic β-cell. A larger α-cell is also
seen. The normal adult pancreas contains around 1 million
islets comprising mainly β-cells (producing insulin), α-cells
(glucagon), D cells (somatostatin) and PP (pancreatic
polypeptide) cells. Islet cell types can be distinguished by
various histologic stains and by the EM appearances of the
secretory granules (as seen here). They can also be identified

secretory granules (as seen here). They can also be identified
by immunocytochemical staining of the peptide hormones
on light or electron microscopy (see Figures 24 and 25)
Figure 28
Electron micrograph of insulin storage granules
(higher power view than in Figure 27) in a patient with an
insulinoma
PATHOGENESIS

26
Figure 29
Insulitis. Histologic section of pancreas from a
child who died at clinical presentation of type 1 diabetes
mellitus.There is a heavy, chronic, inflammatory cell infiltrate
affecting the islet. H & E
Figure 30
The same pancreas as in Figure 29 has been
immunostained to show β-cells: note the destruction of the
β-cells in this islet owing to inflammation; compare with
Figure 24
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS

27
Figure 31
This histologic section of pancreas was obtained at autopsy from a patient 5 years after the onset of type 1 diabetes.
It shows persistence of an infiltrate of lymphocytes (insulitis) some of which have been indicated by arrows, affecting this islet,
immunostained for insulin. This shows that β-cell destruction takes place over years in patients with type 1 diabetes
Figure 32
Autopsy section of an islet from a patient who
had diabetes for 16 years. Although the islet looks fairly
normal on H & E stain (left), insulin staining (right) shows it
is devoid of β-cells
Figure 33
This is a section of pancreas from a 12-year-old
boy who died of a cardiomyopathy. He had a family history
of type 1 diabetes and was considered to be pre-diabetic
because he had high titers of both insulin and islet cell
autoantibodies in autopsy blood, but he did not have
glycosuria in life. The photograph shows two islets affected
by insulitis in his pancreas, confirming that immunologically

by insulitis in his pancreas, confirming that immunologically
mediated β-cell destruction takes place in the preclinical
period of type 1 diabetes
PATHOGENESIS

28
Figure 34
Circulating cytoplasmic islet-cell antibodies
(ICA) can be found in most newly diagnosed type 1 diabetes
mellitus (DM) patients, thereby providing evidence of an
autoimmune pathogenesis of this disorder. ICA are also seen
in the ‘prediabetic’ period and in siblings of type 1 DM
patients, and are a marker of susceptibility to type 1 DM.
This high-power view of a cryostat section of human
pancreas was incubated with serum from a type 1 DM
patient and stained by an indirect immunofluorescence
technique using anti-human IgG fluorescinated antiserum.
Although ICA are serologic markers of β-cell destruction,
the antibodies also stain the entire islet, including glucagon
and somatostatin cells (which, unlike the β-cells, are not
destroyed). The positive reaction is confined to cell
cytoplasm and the nuclei are unstained (seen as black dots)
Figure 35
This section shows that all the endocrine cells
(A, B, D, etc.) in this insulin-containing islet hyperexpress

(A, B, D, etc.) in this insulin-containing islet hyperexpress
class 1 major histocompatibility complex (MHC). Note also
that the islet is not inflamed (no lymphocytes). This suggests
that hyperexpression of class 1 MHC precedes insulitis
within any given islet and is not simply the result of
secretion of cytokines by inflammatory cells in the insulitis
infiltrate
Figure 36
Glucose intolerance occurs in about 30% of
cases of cystic fibrosis, although only 1–2% of patients have
frank diabetes. This low-power view of the pancreas of a
14-year-old child with cystic fibrosis complicated by
diabetes shows complete atrophy of the exocrine pancreas,
but with survival of the islets. Some of the islets (lower part
of field) are embedded in fibrous tissue. H & E
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS

29
Figure 37
This is a coronal section of the tail of the
pancreas from a patient with hemochromatosis. Note the
brown color of the pancreas compared with the surrounding
fat. Normal pancreas tissue appears pale. The smaller piece
of pancreas has been stained with Prussian blue to show the
presence of iron deposits
Figure 38
Hemochromatosis. Hemosiderin deposits in this
low-power view of pancreas are stained blue. Note the
accumulation of iron in the endocrine cells of the islet
(center) as well as in the acinar cells of the exocrine
pancreas. Prussian blue staining
Figure 39
The characteristic histologic abnormality in type
2 diabetes mellitus (DM) is amyloid deposition in the islets,
which is significant in around two-thirds of cases. Increasing
amounts of amyloid deposition are associated with
progressive islet cell damage, which probably contributes to
the insulin deficiency of type 2 DM. In this pancreas from a
patient who had type 2 DM of long standing, two islets

patient who had type 2 DM of long standing, two islets
containing large deposits of amorphous pink-staining
amyloid can be seen
PATHOGENESIS

30
Coxsackie
Mumps
Rubella
Echovirus
Cytomega-
lovirus
Viruses
implicated in the
development of type I
diabetes mellitus
Figure 40
Viruses have been suggested to be a cause or factor in the development of type 1 diabetes mellitus (DM), and are
thought to be the most likely agents to trigger the disease, probably on the basis of genetic predisposition, in some cases.
Evidence comes from epidemiologic studies and the isolation of viruses from the pancreas of a few recently diagnosed type 1
DM patients. Mumps and Coxsackie viruses can cause acute pancreatitis, and Coxsackie virus can cause β-cell destruction
Figure 41
Autopsy sample of histology of Coxsackie B
viral pancreatitis in a neonate. Coxsackie B viral infection
may cause inflammatory destruction of the β-cells and
Coxsackie B viruses have been isolated from the pancreas of
patients with new-onset type 1 diabetes. Injection of such
isolates into mice causes insulitis and β-cell damage. The

isolates into mice causes insulitis and β-cell damage. The
similarity between this picture and the previous one of
insulitis is obvious. Nevertheless, although Coxsackie B virus
may be diabetogenic in men, its precise etiologic importance
in the development of type 1 diabetes remains unclear
Figure 42
This endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreato-
gram shows a normal pancreatic duct
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS

31
Figure 43
This endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreato-
gram shows the typical appearances of chronic pancreatitis.
There is a dilated pancreatic duct with amputation and
beading of the side branches
Figure 44
Plain abdominal radiograph showing pancreatic
calcification due to chronic pancreatitis. Diabetes occurs in
around 45% of cases of chronic pancreatitis and is usually
mild. Approximately one-third of patients will ultimately
require insulin treatment to maintain adequate glycemic
control
Figure 45
This CT scan shows cancer of the pancreas. An
association between adenocarcinoma of the pancreas and
diabetes has long been recognized. Pancreatic cancer may
precede the diagnosis of diabetes, but some epidemiologic
studies suggest that there is an increased risk of pancreatic
cancer in diabetic patients. Unexplained weight loss or back
pain in a patient with type 2 diabetes must always raise the
suspicion of underlying pancreatic cancer
PATHOGENESIS

33
3
Treatment
DIETARY TREATMENT FOR TYPE 1
DIABETES MELLITUS
An integral component of diabetes management by
both the health-care professional and the patient with
diabetes is the need to know the principles of dietary
management of the condition. Nutrition is complex
and a registered dietician is best placed to offer advice
on recommended diets, although all team members
need to be knowledgeable about nutrition therapy.
The dietary recommendations for patients with type 1
diabetes mellitus (DM) do not differ greatly from
those recommended for the general population.
Dietary advice must be tailored to the given patient
and certain population groups require special consid-
eration, for example, particular ethnic minorities or
children.
The total fat intake should not exceed 30% of total
energy intake, and < 10% should come from saturated
fats. Dietary cholesterol intake should be less than
300 mg/day. Intake of trans unsaturated fatty acids

300 mg/day. Intake of trans unsaturated fatty acids
should be kept to a minimum. Carbohydrates, pre-
dominantly complex carbohydrates, should comprise
> 50% of the total energy intake. Foods containing car-
bohydrate from whole grains, fruits and vegetables
should be included in the diet. The total amount of
carbohydrate in meals or snacks is more important
than the source, type or glycemic index of the carbo-
hydrate. Non-nutritive sweeteners are safe when con-
sumed within acceptable daily limits. Consumption of
simple sugars, e.g. sucrose, is acceptable in moderate
amounts, as they do not cause acute hyperglycemia
(unlike glucose which does) as long as they are con-
sumed within a healthy diet. Dietary fiber should be
increased, ideally to > 30 g/day, and it is preferable that
this be taken in the form of natural soluble fiber as
found in legumes, grain cereals or fruit. Protein should
comprise approximately 10–15% of total energy
intake.

comprise approximately 10–15% of total energy
intake.
Moderate sodium restriction and the national gen-
eral recommendations for alcohol ingestion should be
followed, and ‘diabetic foods’ and ‘diabetic beers’ are
best avoided. Regular main meals with between-meal
and bedtime snacks remain the usual basis of dietary
treatment for type 1 DM patients. The size and distri-
bution of the meals should be dictated by the individ-
ual patient’s preferences and habits, unless these give
rise to major problems with glycemic control or
weight gain.
An understanding of the carbohydrate content of
foods remains necessary, but detailed and over-precise
‘carbohydrate exchange lists’ can be misleading.
Although some centers have abandoned the use of
formal carbohydrate exchange lists, others remain
enthusiastic about their use to match insulin dose with
quantity of carbohydrate ingested in an attempt to
improve smooth blood glucose control and allow
patients greater choice of food intake (see Dose

improve smooth blood glucose control and allow
patients greater choice of food intake (see Dose
Adjustment for Normal Eating program below).
One advantage to patients of the widely used basal-
bolus insulin regimens is that meals no longer need to
be taken at a fixed time to avoid hypoglycemia – a
degree of flexibility is allowed by matching the bolus
ingestion of rapidly acting insulin to the meal time.

34
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
DIETARY TREATMENT FOR TYPE 2
DIABETES MELLITUS
Diet is the cornerstone of treatment of type 2 DM.
Simple initial advice for calorie restriction and avoid-
ance of sweet foods and drinks can lead to sympto-
matic improvement and a fall in blood glucose levels
before any reductions in body weight are detectable.
More detailed advice is then required to formulate a
long-term strategy. The main goal is to correct obesity
as weight loss will improve blood glucose control,
lower blood pressure and lower blood lipid concentra-
tions, all of which may be expected to improve the
prognosis for patients with type 2 DM. A diet similar
to that advised for patients with type 1 DM is recom-
mended with special emphasis on lowered fat intake
and reduced energy intake.
Dietary failure is common in the treatment of over-
weight associated with type 2 DM. At the outset,
avoidance of fat in the diet must be stressed and it is

avoidance of fat in the diet must be stressed and it is
important to define realistic body-weight targets and
rates of weight loss. Discussion of ideal body weight
from actuarial tables is usually met with dismay and
discourages patients. A rate of weight loss of about
0.5 kg/week is realistic. Progressive long-term weight
loss is rarely achieved. Positive discussion and encour-
agement are to be recommended as outright censure
and accusations of ‘cheating’ are unhelpful. The use of
orlistat (Xenical®, Roche) which reduces intestinal fat
absorption may help some patients with their weight
loss program. An increase in regular exercise and
avoidance of smoking are also advisable.
Exercise and diabetes
Taking exercise has been a recommendation in
patients with type 2 DM for a very long time. The
corollary is that type 2 DM is more likely to occur in
populations that are physically sedentary. Thus,
patients with type 2 DM may be innately resistant to

patients with type 2 DM may be innately resistant to
the suggestion that they take physical exercise and this
frequently presents a challenge to diabetes educators
and physicians. From a meta-analysis of clinical trials
examining the effect of exercise interventions on
glycemic control and BMI in type 2 DM, subjects in
the intervention group achieved a glycosylated hemo-
globin (HbA1c) value that was 0.66% lower than that
of the control group. Interestingly, there was no differ-
ence in body weight between the exercise and the
control group suggesting that exercise has a beneficial
effect independent of a reduction in body weight.
An inverse association between mortality and
physical activity has been demonstrated in men with
type 1 DM. Regular exercise has also been shown to
lead to reduced morbidity and mortality in type 2
DM. Furthermore, as discussed at more length else-
where (vida supra), exercise has been shown to reduce
the risk of developing type 2 diabetes in people with

the risk of developing type 2 diabetes in people with
impaired glucose tolerance. Exercise improves insulin
sensitivity in both those with impaired glucose toler-
ance and diabetes – both type 1 and type 2.
Specific recommendations and guidelines for exer-
cise by diabetic patients have been published by the
American Diabetes Association and it is important to
stress that even non-strenuous exercise such as regular
walking (‘walking the malls’) is beneficial. Prescrip-
tions for exercise should be tailored to the individual
patient taking into account comorbidity and patient
choice. Patients are not likely to continue with sports
or exercises that they do not enjoy – in practical terms
this may create real problems for many patients and
their advisors.
For patients with type 1 DM, a reduction in insulin
dosage is often required before exercise with dose
reductions of 30–50% being common, although indi-
viduals’ response to exercise may differ and the neces-

viduals’ response to exercise may differ and the neces-
sary dose reduction has to be determined by trial and
error using blood glucose measurements before, during
and after exercise. It will also be affected by the type,
duration and intensity of the physical activity. In type
2 DM, exercise does not usually cause hypoglycemia
but may do so in those patients taking oral sulfonyl-
ureas or, of course, being treated with insulin. In nor-
mal subjects, insulin secretion declines during moder-
ately intense aerobic exercise to compensate for
increased muscle insulin sensitivity. In type 1 DM, as
all insulin is exogenous, this cannot occur and this, in
combination with increased insulin absorption if the
insulin is injected into a limb which is subsequently
exercised and the use of intermediate or long-acting
insulin, often leads to hyperinsulinemia and hypo-
glycemia if corrective actions are not taken as indi-
cated above. Paradoxically, if hypoinsulinemia occurs,

cated above. Paradoxically, if hypoinsulinemia occurs,
especially during intensive exercise, increased glucose
production, decreased peripheral glucose uptake and
increased levels of counter-regulatory hormones lead-
ing to lipid breakdown and ketogenesis can cause the
development of both hyperglycemia and ketosis.

35
TREATMENT
INSULIN TREATMENT OF TYPE 1 DIABETES
MELLITUS
The Diabetes Control and Complications Trial
(DCCT) published in the USA in 1993 established
beyond all reasonable doubt that intensive insulin
therapy delays the onset and slows the progression of
diabetic microvascular complications. The achieve-
ment of good blood glucose control while avoiding
hypoglycemia is therefore the therapeutic goal for
most patients with type 1 DM. For the majority of
patients this proves to be a major challenge despite
considerable input from the diabetic team. Diabetic
specialist nurses have assumed a major role in helping
patients reach appropriate targets.
A large number of insulins are available to treat
patients with type 1 DM and many new formulations
have appeared in recent years and continue to appear.
Insulin analogs have rightly secured a firm place in the
insulin market. For the non-specialist clinician it is
advisable to become familiar with commonly pre-

advisable to become familiar with commonly pre-
scribed insulins and the regimens that are applied in
their use. In clinical practice, only two classes of insulin
are needed in the attempt to mimic physiologic insulin
secretion: a rapid-acting formulation to cover meals
and a longer-acting preparation to provide steady state
basal levels between meals and overnight. Rapid and
longer-acting insulins can be combined in the same
cartridge as a fixed mixture (or premixed insulins).
Rapid-acting insulins include soluble (regular) insulin
that should be injected around 30 min before a meal
or rapid-acting insulin analogs (insulin lispro (Huma-
log®,
Eli Lilly),
insulin aspart (NovoRapid®,
NovoNordisk) and insulin glulisine (Apidra®, Sanofi
Aventis)) that can be injected at the time of the meal.
Longer-acting insulin preparations include conven-
tional NPH (isophane) insulin and the insulin analogs
insulin glargine (Lantus®, Sanofi Aventis) and insulin

insulin glargine (Lantus®, Sanofi Aventis) and insulin
detemir (Levemir®, NovoNordisk). In many countries,
such as the UK, and more recently the USA, insulin
delivery via a pen device, so called insulin pens, has
become by far the most popular method of subcuta-
neous insulin administration. A list of commonly used
insulin preparations is illustrated in Figure 50. Cur-
rently recommended insulin regimens are many and
varied and include twice-daily insulins, basal-bolus reg-
imens and continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion.
Twice-daily insulins – free or mixed
The simplest regimen is to inject insulin subcuta-
neously twice a day, before breakfast and before the
evening meal. Although patients’ needs differ, in gen-
eral two-thirds of the total daily insulin dose is given
in the morning with one-third in the evening. Using
conventional insulin preparations, the ability of injec-
tions performed 30–40 min before meals to match
postprandial glucose excursions, although crude, is

tions performed 30–40 min before meals to match
postprandial glucose excursions, although crude, is
illustrated in Figure 60. The ratio of soluble to iso-
phane insulin can be determined by the patient’s sub-
sequent blood glucose measurements (with a starting
ratio of one-third soluble to two-thirds isophane).
Fine-tuning of the insulin doses is possible, however,
many patients find this difficult and there is a place for
the use of fixed mixtures that are available in many
ratios of soluble to isophane (10/90, 20/80, 30/70,
40/60, 50/50). Pre-mixed insulins are widely used in
analog form (Humalog Mix 25®, NovoMix 30®).
It is widely recognized that such regimens have
their drawbacks. Inflexibility is one as is the need to
eat three meals a day with mid-meal snacks to avoid
hypoglycemia owing to the persistence of the effect of
the short-acting insulin. In addition, the peak effect of
the evening intermediate insulin occurs between mid-
night and 03.00 when the need is least and then

night and 03.00 when the need is least and then
diminishes towards morning when insulin require-
ments are rising again. Increasing the before-dinner
isophane to cope with pre-breakfast hyperglycemia
leads to nocturnal hypoglycemia which may go unrec-
ognized and is one of the biggest problems in the treat-
ment of type 1 DM. To some extent, this can be coun-
teracted by delaying the evening injection of isophane
insulin to before bed.
Basal-bolus regimens
This regimen has become perhaps the most widely
used in recent years. The rationale is that a long-acting
insulin administered at bedtime provides a ‘basal’
insulin level that is supplemented before meals by
short-acting insulin to cope with the rise in postpran-
dial blood glucose.
Earlier regimens most commonly used NPH (iso-
phane) as the basal insulin but, more recently, NPH
has been increasingly replaced by insulin glargine

36
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
(Lantus®) and insulin detemir (Levemir®). Glargine
can be given at any fixed time of day most commonly
before bed or at breakfast. These later insulins exhibit
more reproducibility in terms of their biological action
compared to NPH. Some regimens incorporate the use
of twice-daily injections of glargine or detemir. A
major advantage of such regimens is that they allow
the patient more flexibility with the timing of meals;
if lunch is delayed, for instance, the injection of short-
acting insulin can simply be given later. Patients should
not, however, be tempted to miss either meals or the
preceding insulin.
Although allowing greater flexibility, there is no
overwhelming evidence that the multiple-injection
regimen produces better glycemic control than twice-
daily injections of short-acting insulin with isophane.
The short-acting insulin analogs have much shorter
onsets of action than soluble insulin and shorter dura-

onsets of action than soluble insulin and shorter dura-
tions of action. One major advantage to patients is that
they may be injected at the time of eating rather than
30–40 min beforehand. Furthermore, evidence sug-
gests that their usage may be associated with less
hypoglycemia occurring mid-morning, mid-afternoon
and during the night. These insulins have rapidly
become immensely popular with diabetic patients,
especially the young. Humalog has usefully been for-
mulated into a fixed mixture preparation (Humalog
Mix 25) with a short to intermediate ratio of 25/75
and NovoRapid into a fixed mixture (NovoMix 30)
with a short to intermediate ratio of 30/70.
There has been much debate regarding the impor-
tance of insulin species, centered on the hypothesis
that the use of human insulin (produced by either
enzymatic modification or recombinant-DNA tech-
nology) is associated with lack of hypoglycemia aware-
ness. The hypothesis has tended to be patient-driven

ness. The hypothesis has tended to be patient-driven
and the current consensus, based on a wealth of clini-
cal studies, is that there is no scientific evidence to
support such a contention. However, if patients
express a wish to resume porcine insulin, they should
be allowed to do so as no harm will result from such a
switch.
Continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion
Continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion (CSII)
attempts to emulate physiologic insulin secretion with
low basal insulin delivery using a small portable
battery-driven pump and a reservoir of short-acting
soluble insulin. From the pump, a plastic delivery can-
nula that ends in a fine-gauge ‘butterfly’ needle is usu-
ally inserted subcutaneously into the anterior abdomi-
nal wall. The site of implantation must be changed
every 1–2 days to avoid local inflammation. The basal
infusion is supplemented at mealtimes by a prandial
boost activated by the patient.The basal rate and pran-

boost activated by the patient.The basal rate and pran-
dial boosts are determined according to each individ-
ual patient after a brief admission to hospital or by
intensive outpatient education.
Continuous subcutaneous insulin requires a com-
prehensive education program prior to its use. The
hospitals participating in the use of this technique are
required to provide a 24-h telephone service so that
pump patients can receive immediate advice.
Most patients using this method of treatment
achieve excellent control of blood glucose levels.
However, disadvantages include the logistic problems
in setting up such a service, the problem of funding the
pumps which are expensive and the possibility of sys-
tem malfunction, usually related to the insulin syringe
in the pump, cannula, needle or infusion site. Such
problems may partly explain the incidence of ketoaci-
dosis in patients treated by continuous subcutaneous
insulin, although many experienced centers through-

insulin, although many experienced centers through-
out the world are now reporting a significant decrease
in ketoacidosis rates. Skin complications are also seen,
but hypoglycemia is no more common than with con-
ventional treatments despite the ability of CSII to pro-
duce a significant improvement in blood glucose con-
trol. At present, the use of insulin pumps should be
considered for selected patients (such as, when con-
ventional insulin injection treatment has failed with
poor glycemic control, unstable blood glucose levels
and significant recurrent hypoglycemia) and requires
referral to centers specializing in this treatment modal-
ity. Increasing numbers of patients without any of the
specific problems outlined above may opt for this
form of treatment if appropriate funding is available
and CSII usage is particularly high in the USA and cer-
tain countries of the European Union where such
funding is available.
BLOOD GLUCOSE MONITORING

tain countries of the European Union where such
funding is available.
BLOOD GLUCOSE MONITORING
The ability of the diabetic patient to monitor the
effect of their treatment on their blood glucose levels
remains one of the major challenges of diabetes care.

37
TREATMENT
At long last exciting new methodology appears to be
on the horizon. At present, however, most patients
self-monitor their blood glucose using a wide array of
commercially available blood glucose meters which all
achieve clinically acceptable standards of accuracy and
precision at least in laboratory assessment. Not all
patients (nor indeed nurses and doctors in hospital
wards) are able to achieve such standards.This empha-
sizes the need for adequate instruction in the tech-
nique and regular quality-control assessment. Unfortu-
nately, finger pricking to produce an aliquot of blood
for self-monitoring is an unpleasant procedure, cer-
tainly associated with more discomfort than insulin
injections. This may inhibit the performance of testing
using current technology.
Blood glucose measurements are taken before and
after meals and, on the basis of a profile of several
days’ readings, a decision is made regarding the need to
alter the insulin dosages. In practice, however,

alter the insulin dosages. In practice, however,
although most patients become reasonably adept at
blood glucose measurement, only a minority of
patients acquire the skill of appropriate adjustment of
insulin dosages.The exception to this seems to be most
patients who have been on a DAFNE course as alluded
to below.
Furthermore, there is controversy as to the mini-
mum number of readings required each day. A com-
promise would be two readings per day with variations
in the timing of the readings on alternate days. Alter-
natively profiles of four or more readings may be done
on selected days during the week. More intensive
monitoring is recommended during intercurrent ill-
ness and when insulin treatment is being changed or
adjusted.
Among the more tangible benefits of self-monitor-
ing are that the technique allows patients to recognize
that certain symptoms represent hypoglycemia and
that the ingestion of certain foods leads to an unac-

that the ingestion of certain foods leads to an unac-
ceptable increase in blood glucose concentration. It
also allows the assessment of the individual’s glucose
response to various types of exercise. There is no con-
clusive evidence of benefit of self-monitoring of blood
glucose in patients with type 2 diabetes except for
those on insulin therapy, although, it may be helpful
during concurrent illness.
Clearly recognized disadvantages of current blood
glucose sampling systems are the need for skin lancing
and the practical limitations of obtaining samples fre-
quently enough to allow meaningful manipulation of
insulin dosage with either subcutaneous injections or
continuous pump methods. Technological progress has
been made here in the development and availability of
continuous glucose monitoring using a subcutaneously
implanted continuous monitoring system (MiniMed
Inc., Sylmar, CA, USA). The subcutaneous sensor is
connected by a cable to a monitor/microprocessor

Inc., Sylmar, CA, USA). The subcutaneous sensor is
connected by a cable to a monitor/microprocessor
device that is worn externally (Figure 69). Interstitial
fluid glucose is measured frequently and the data are
downloaded at a later time. This information can then
be used to refine and adjust patients’ diabetes man-
agement resulting in improved glycemic control and
avoidance of hypoglycemia. Studies to date have
demonstrated disturbing changes in blood glucose val-
ues that could not have been anticipated using con-
ventional self-monitoring techniques. A wristwatch-
like device that uses a process known as reverse
iontophoresis and is able to produce similar results on
a real-time basis with warning of hypoglycemia has
been marketed, but has not proved to be as useful and
as acceptable in practice as had been thought at prod-
uct launch.
ROLE OF EDUCATION
Most type 1 DM patients achieve, at best, only subop-
timal control of blood glucose levels. Around 25% of

timal control of blood glucose levels. Around 25% of
adult type 1 diabetic patients exhibit persistent poor
glycemic control. Lower socioeconomic status and
psychologic factors including lack of motivation,
emotional distress, depression and eating disorders
have been associated with poor control. Clinical expe-
rience over decades and data from the Diabetes Con-
trol and Complications Trial (DCCT) emphasize the
role of diabetic education in the attainment of good
glycemic control. Constant teaching, encouragement
and support of these patients combined with open
access to diabetes specialist nurses (DSNs) are funda-
mental to this goal. Methods of improving glycemic
control include strategies that facilitate self-manage-
ment, such as motivational strategies, coping-orien-
tated education and psychosocial therapies, and inten-
sification of insulin injection therapy or CSII. One
self-empowering intensive educational program called
DAFNE (Dose Adjustment for Normal Eating) origi-

DAFNE (Dose Adjustment for Normal Eating) origi-
nally developed in Germany has consistently been
shown to lead to an improved quality of life, greater
freedom of choice of food and a fall in HbA1c levels.

38
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
This program has been taken up enthusiastically in
many centers.
However, there are patients who remain supremely
resistant to such measures. Patients with major meta-
bolic instability, referred to as ‘brittle’ diabetics, are
usually young women who are mildly overweight and
who tend to spend several weeks each year in hospital.
Although there are many theories as to the cause of
such brittleness, for example, defective insulin absorp-
tion or inappropriate insulin regimens, there is a grow-
ing conviction that psychologic disturbance is the root
cause. Not unexpectedly, motivation appears to be a
key factor in achieving good blood glucose control.
This is best exemplified in cases of diabetic pregnancy
where virtually all mothers-to-be manage to achieve
near normoglycemia.
ASSESSMENT OF GLYCEMIC CONTROL
The concept of diabetic control includes a feeling of
well-being, avoidance of hypoglycemia and absence of

well-being, avoidance of hypoglycemia and absence of
ketoacidosis. It must also include an assessment of
blood glucose levels. As mentioned above, a false
assessment of the degree of control established can be
made if this only includes the patient’s own blood
results. Measurement of HbA1c or total HbA1 must
also be included when assessing control and is com-
plementary to the patient’s results. Normal self-
monitored blood glucose results in the presence of ele-
vated HbA1c usually imply either falsification of
results, an inability to perform the test properly or a
fault in the blood glucose meter, if one is being used.
Glycosylated (glycated) hemoglobin refers to a
series of minor hemoglobin components formed by
the adduction of glucose to normal adult hemoglobin.
The usefulness of this measurement is that it reflects
the integrated blood glucose concentration over a
period that approximates the half-life of the red cell,
6–8 weeks. Although factors which affect red cell sur-

6–8 weeks. Although factors which affect red cell sur-
vival may invalidate this test, they are uncommon in
clinical practice (except perhaps in patients of African-
Caribbean origin).
Although measurement of HbA1c has become the
gold standard in the assessment of diabetic control it
may not accurately reflect the true level of excursions
of glucose in the period studied. What HbA1c level
should patients try to attain? Ideally, the answer is nor-
mality, but this is a counsel of perfection that may be
associated with an unacceptably high risk of hypo-
glycemia. Levels of around 6% are certainly acceptable
and patients should probably strive to maintain levels
of ≤7%. It is important to know the normal ranges for
different laboratories (depending on the methodology
used for measurement) before making comparisons
between clinical centers. Ideally the normal range for
HbA1c should be DCCT aligned.
Integrated glycemia over a much shorter period of

HbA1c should be DCCT aligned.
Integrated glycemia over a much shorter period of
time may be assessed by measurement of glycated pro-
teins (fructosamine), although, because of uncertainty
pertaining to its use, this assay has not become widely
adopted.
DRUG AND INSULIN TREATMENT FOR
TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
The treatment of type 2 DM continues to be a major
therapeutic challenge. Our knowledge of the efficacy
of treatment strategies was informed by the landmark
intervention study, the United Kingdom Prospective
Diabetes Study (UKPDS). In this study, an intensive
glucose control policy, which was able to maintain a
HbA1c value 0.9% lower than conventional treatment,
was associated with significant reductions in the risk of
microvascular endpoints. The UKPDS has demon-
strated the progressive nature of type 2 diabetes and
the need to employ combination treatments and
insulin to achieve target goals. Redefining of such goals
has also occurred, and the American Diabetes Associ-

has also occurred, and the American Diabetes Associ-
ation has proposed a target value for HbA1c of 7.0%,
while the European Diabetes Project Group has pro-
posed a HbA1c value of ≤6.5%.
Dietary modification and physical activity are the
mainstay of treatment of type 2 diabetes. However, it
is well recognized that only a minority of type 2 dia-
betes patients are able to achieve long-term glycemic
control by such measures alone. Failure of dietary
treatment is due to either (or both) an inability to sus-
tain the necessary diet modifications or worsening of
the diabetic state. Drug treatment should not be insti-
tuted until an adequate trial of diet has been shown to
have failed. However, there is now an increasing ten-
dency to advocate an intensive aggressive therapeutic
strategy from the outset to reduce fasting blood glu-
cose and HbA1c levels to those defined above in an
effort to minimize the risk of future complications.
When diet fails, treatment with oral hypoglycemic

39
TREATMENT
agents is indicated, initially as monotherapy, and if and
when that fails as combination therapy. Five classes of
oral antidiabetic agents are currently available. In the
past sulfonylureas have been widely prescribed as first-
line agents after dietary failure (in some countries
α-glucosidase inhibitors have had this role). However,
the UKPDS has shown significant benefits for met-
formin as a first-line agent especially in obese patients.
The place of agents such as meglitinides and thiazo-
lidinediones (glitazones) as initial monotherapy is still
subject to assessment and review.
Sulfonylureas
Sulfonylureas stimulate insulin secretion from the
β-cell. They also appear to sensitize the β-cell to vari-
ous other insulin secretagogs, such as glucose. An
improvement in insulin resistance may also be
observed with the sulfonylureas, but this is thought to
be secondary to their primary mode of action and not
a direct effect of the drug.

be secondary to their primary mode of action and not
a direct effect of the drug.
Among sulfonylureas, there is a wide variation in
half-life, ranging from 3–8 h (tolbutamide) to 35 h
(chlorpropamide). Side-effects, such as skin rashes, are
relatively uncommon with the exception of hypo-
glycemia. Particular caution should be taken in type 2
diabetic patients with renal failure. Sulfonylureas have
a tendency to produce weight gain, although any inter-
vention that improves diabetic control in a patient fol-
lowing an isocaloric diet would be expected to result
in such an effect.
Metformin
Metformin lowers plasma glucose by inhibiting
hepatic glucose production and increasing the sensitiv-
ity of peripheral tissue to insulin. It does not usually
cause hypoglycemia but, as it is renally excreted, it
should not be used in patients with renal impairment.
Gastrointestinal side-effects are common and
include diarrhea, anorexia, dyspepsia and a metallic

Gastrointestinal side-effects are common and
include diarrhea, anorexia, dyspepsia and a metallic
taste in the mouth. To minimize the occurrence of
side-effects, patients should be started on a low dose.
Weight gain is usually not a problem with metformin,
possibly because it has a slight anorectic effect. Lactic
acidosis (which led to the withdrawal of phenformin)
is a potentially serious side-effect of metformin ther-
apy, but is rare and unlikely to occur if the drug is not
used in patients with hepatic disease, renal impair-
ment or severe cardiac problems.
α-Glucosidase inhibitors
These drugs, which include acarbose (Glucobay®,
Bayer) and miglitol (Glyset®, Bayer), are widely used
first-line agents in Japan. They delay the absorption of
complex carbohydrates from the gastrointestinal tract
and are of value in controlling postprandial hyper-
glycemia; however, their blood glucose lowering effect
is lower than those of metformin or the sulfonylureas,

is lower than those of metformin or the sulfonylureas,
and the side-effects of flatulence and diarrhea often
limit their tolerability.
Meglitinides (or prandial glucose regulators)
These newer agents, like the sulfonylureas, act via clo-
sure of K-ATP channels in the β-cells, although their
receptor binding characteristics are different. They
include repaglinide (NovoNorm®, Novo Nordisk) and
nateglinide (Starlix®, Novartis) and they rapidly pro-
duce a short-lived insulin release that is dependent on
the concentration of glucose. Thus, taken before meals
they restore towards normal the delayed and impaired
insulin response to meals seen in type 2 diabetes, with-
out causing hypoglycemia. Evidence suggests that
prandial glucose spikes may have a role in the devel-
opment of diabetic macrovascular complications but,
as yet, there is no consensus as to the place of prandial
glucose regulation in the management of type 2 dia-
betes. Meglitinides may safely be used in combination

betes. Meglitinides may safely be used in combination
with metformin. In some countries, the enthusiasm for
use of these drugs appears to be declining and they
have not established themselves as first-line agents.
The cost of meglitinides is high compared with that of
generic sulfonylureas.
Thiazolidinediones (glitazones)
The initial enthusiasm for the thiazolidinediones (or
glitazones) was tempered by the severe hepatotoxicity
associated with troglitazone, which has now been
withdrawn. The newer glitazones, rosiglitazone (Avan-
dia®, GlaxoSmithKline) and pioglitazone (Actos®,
Takeda) show no significant association with hepato-
toxicity. Their mode of action is mediated by activa-
tion of the nuclear receptor peroxisome proliferator-

40
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
activated receptor-gamma (PPARγ), which is found
predominantly in adipose tissue but also in skeletal
muscle and liver. This leads to stimulation of insulin-
sensitive proteins with a reduction of hepatic glucose
production and an increase in peripheral glucose
uptake. Thiazolidinediones act to increase fatty acid
uptake into adipocytes thus lowering triglyceride and
non-esterified fatty acid levels which contribute to the
favorable effect on glucose metabolism outlined
above. They also induce adipocyte differentiation. As
monotherapy these agents are comparable with sul-
fonylureas and metformin but, because of the effects
outlined above, they may prove to have a particularly
beneficial role in ameliorating insulin resistance. They
reduce intra-abdominal fat deposition but also pro-
mote peripheral fat deposition. This latter effect and
their tendency to produce edema is associated with
weight gain. They should not be used in patients with

weight gain. They should not be used in patients with
cardiac failure or who are at risk of developing heart
failure.
In a prospective randomized controlled trial (the
PROACTIVE study), 5238 patients with type 2 DM
who had evidence of macrovascular disease were
assigned to pioglitazone or placebo and studied for
nearly 36 months. Although there was no statistically
significant reduction in the study composite primary
endpoint, the use of pioglitazone was associated with
a significant reduction in the secondary composite
endpoint of all-cause mortality, non-fatal myocardial
infarction and stroke, suggesting that glitazones may
have a role in secondary prevention of macrovascular
events in patients with type 2 diabetes.
Insulin
If diabetic control remains unacceptable despite
dietary improvements with oral drug treatment,
insulin therapy may be indicated. Insulin is the only
efficacious therapy in type 2 DM once significant
β-cell failure has supervened. Oral agents fail to lower

β-cell failure has supervened. Oral agents fail to lower
blood glucose levels adequately once β-cell reserve
falls below about 15% of normal. Approximately half
of all patients with type 2 DM will need insulin ther-
apy within 6 years of diagnosis because of a progres-
sive decline in β-cell function. It seems sensible to out-
line this potential future therapeutic direction to
patients at the time of diagnosis. In patients with type
2 DM, insulin therapy may be associated with an
increase in weight, especially in those who are over
eating in the first place. This is unavoidable as the
patients are unlikely, at this stage, to reduce their
caloric intake. If substantially improved glycemic con-
trol is obtained, this will probably override the detri-
mental effects of any weight gained by the patient.
However, the majority of normal-weight or moder-
ately overweight type 2 DM patients transferring to
insulin gain only a modest amount of weight (around
2–4 kg).

insulin gain only a modest amount of weight (around
2–4 kg).
There are many ways of giving insulin to patients
with type 2 DM and each regimen has its own advo-
cates. No universal consensus exists, although studies
examining this issue are in progress. One simple and
popular approach is to give a subcutaneous injection
of an intermediate or long-acting insulin (NPH, insulin
glargine or insulin detemir) before bed with the object
of normalizing the pre-breakfast blood glucose. Possi-
ble alternative regimens, or when the above approach
fails to deliver adequate glycemic control, include
twice-daily injections of fixed mixtures of soluble and
intermediate-acting insulins (e.g. Human Mixtard 30,
NovoMix 30 (Novo Nordisk) or Humalog Mix 25 (Eli
Lilly)) given before or at breakfast and the evening
meal according to insulin type. Finally, and especially
in the context of severe insulin deficiency, insulin may
be administered in a basal bolus regimen, as for type 1

be administered in a basal bolus regimen, as for type 1
DM patients, with short-acting insulin given with each
meal accompanied by an injection of a longer-acting
insulin before bed. Metformin treatment can be con-
tinued in those who are overweight to lower insulin
resistance. In the USA, thiazolidinediones (glitazones)
are licensed for use in combination with insulin except
in those who show any evidence of heart failure. Such
a combination is not yet licensed in Europe. Insulin
therapy dictates the need to practice self blood glucose
monitoring.
Other drugs
Logically, drugs used for the treatment of obesity
might have a beneficial effect in type 2 DM by
improving insulin sensitivity as a result of weight loss.
Studies have demonstrated such benefit for the lipase
inhibitor orlistat (Xenical) and for the serotonin–
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor sibutramine (Knoll
Pharmaceuticals), but the exact role of these drugs in
the management of type 2 DM is not clear.

41
TREATMENT
Treatment strategy
Metformin is the drug of choice in overweight patients
who are not intolerant of this agent. In those over-
weight patients who are intolerant of metformin, gli-
tazone monotherapy is a possible alternative. In
patients who are not overweight (BMI 19–25 or 19–23
in South Asian people), metformin or a sulfonylurea
can be used. When monotherapy fails, a second drug is
added, e.g. a sulfonylurea or glitazone for those on
metformin alone or metformin or a glitazone for those
on a sulfonylurea alone.When treatment with two oral
hypoglycemic agents fails then consideration should
be given to the addition of insulin or the use of ‘triple
therapy’ (sulfonylurea, metformin and a glitazone). In
the regimens described a prandial glucose regulator
may be substituted for a sulfonylurea, although a
generic sulfonylurea would be preferred. As men-
tioned previously, some specialists use a glitazone in
combination with insulin in special circumstances. If

combination with insulin in special circumstances. If
patients have a BMI of less than 19 at presentation
they should be treated with a sulfonylurea but very
frequently monitored as they may need to proceed to
insulin therapy on an early basis.
No treatment of type 2 DM should focus solely on
glycemic control. As the cause of death in type 2 DM
is major vascular disease, rigorous attention must be
paid to the treatment of hypertension, lowering of
blood lipids, the cessation of smoking and an active
program of exercise.
ISLET CELL AND PANCREATIC
TRANSPLANTATION
The dream of every patient with type 1 DM is to per-
manently rid themselves of the need to administer
exogenous insulin on a daily basis. Islet cell and pan-
creatic transplantation has the potential to achieve this
aim.
Islet cell transplantation
The concept of transplanting pieces or extracts of pan-
creas in patients with diabetes is over a century old. By
the 1980s, reports of successful allogeneic islet trans-

the 1980s, reports of successful allogeneic islet trans-
plantation with the use of conventional immunosup-
pression and purified human islets from cadaveric
donors began to appear. However, the overall rates of
success internationally were reported to be less than
10%. In 2000, Shapiro and co-workers in Edmonton
reported a 100% success rate in seven patients. The
Edmonton patients were highly selected and a novel
steroid-free immunosuppression regimen was used
consisting of pre- and post-transplant daclizumab (an
anti-interleukin 2 receptor monoclonal antibody),
maintenance sirolimus and low-dose tacrolimus. An
adequate mass of freshly isolated islets usually from
two sequential donors was freshly transplanted by
embolization into the liver through a small catheter
placed under fluoroscopic guidance into the main por-
tal vein. In an extended series of 32 consecutive
patients with type 1 DM treated in Edmonton, the
1-year rate of sustained insulin independence was

patients with type 1 DM treated in Edmonton, the
1-year rate of sustained insulin independence was
85%. At present, the Edmonton protocol, or variants
thereof, is being subjected to trials at several other
international centers, with some centers already
reporting successful cases. Clearly, there are many hur-
dles to overcome before islet cell transplantation can
be a more universal technique not least of which is the
skill in preparing the islets and the availability of donor
pancreases.
Whole-pancreas transplantation
Until the advent of successful islet cell transplantation,
whole-pancreas transplantation was the only technique
that could consistently restore endogenous secretion of
insulin responsive to normal mechanisms of feedback
control. Many thousand (over 15 000 up to 2001) pan-
creatic transplantations have been performed world-
wide, the majority of which have been simultaneous
pancreas-kidney transplants (SPKs). Some centers, for

pancreas-kidney transplants (SPKs). Some centers, for
example the Minnesota group, have been enthusiastic
advocates of pancreas transplants alone (PTA) for
selected patients. Surgical techniques have improved
greatly over the past few decades and have incorpo-
rated both enteric and bladder drainage of the exocrine
pancreas. Significant advances in immunosuppressive
regimens, particularly with the introduction of the use
of tacrolimus as an immunosuppressant, have con-
tributed to better outcomes for transplanted patients.
For SPK recipients the actuarial survival of patients
and of functional pancreas grafts with complete inde-
pendence from insulin are 94% and 89% at 1 year and
81% and 67% at 5 years, respectively. The results for
PTA grafts remain inferior to SPK grafts with pancreas
graft survival being significantly lower.

42
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
SPK remains an excellent treatment option for dia-
betic patients in advanced renal failure, while PTA
may transform the lives of those with rapidly advanc-
ing microvascular complications or serious hypo-
glycemic unawareness, although life-long immunosup-
pression will remain an issue. Undoubtedly, further
progress will be made especially with regard to
immunosuppressive regimens; however, the problem
of a shortage of cadaver organs will always exist,
although some centers have employed the use of liv-
ing donor segmental pancreas transplants.
It is speculated that further success with islet cell
transplantation may reduce the need for SPK or PTA
transplantation and improved diabetes treatments may
obviate the need for both.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Alberti KGGM, Gries FA. Management of non-insulin
dependent diabetes in Europe: a consensus view. Diabetic
Med 1988; 5: 275–81
American Diabetes Association. Nutritional recommenda-

Med 1988; 5: 275–81
American Diabetes Association. Nutritional recommenda-
tions and principles for people with diabetes mellitus. Dia-
betes Care 2000; 23 (Suppl I): s43–6
American Diabetes Association. Nutritional principles and
recommendations in diabetes. Diabetes Care 2004; 27
(Suppl 1): s36–s46
DeVries JH, Snoek FJ, Heine RJ. Persistent poor glycaemic
control in adult type 1 diabetes. A closer look at the prob-
lem. Diabetic Med 2004; 21: 1263–8
Dormandy JA, Charbonnel B, Eckland DJA, et al. Secondary
prevention of macrovascular events in patients with type 2
diabetes in the PROactive Study (PROspective pioglitAzone
Clinical Trial in macroVascular Events): a randomized con-
trolled trial. Lancet 2005; 366: 1279–89
European IDDM Policy Group. Consensus guidelines for the
management of insulin-dependent (type I) diabetes. Bus-
sum: Medicom Europen BV, 1993
Gale EA. New hypoglycemic therapies. J R Coll Physicians
Lond 2000; 34: 250–3

Gale EA. New hypoglycemic therapies. J R Coll Physicians
Lond 2000; 34: 250–3
Gerich JE. Oral hypoglycaemic agents. N Engl J Med 1989;
34: 1231–45
Lebovitz HE, Banerji MA. Insulin resistance and its treat-
ment by thiazolidinediones. Recent Prog Horm Res 2001;
56: 265–94
Mudaliar S, Henry RR. New oral therapies for type 2 dia-
betes mellitus: the glitazones or insulin sensitizers.Annu Rev
Med 2001; 52: 239–57
Nutrition Subcommittee of the British Diabetic Associa-
tion’s Professional Advisory Committee. Dietary recommen-
dations for people with diabetes: an update for the 1990s.
Diabet Med 1992; 9: 189–202
Robertson PR. Islet transplantation as a treatment for dia-
betes – a work in progress. N Engl J Med 2004; 350:
694–705
Robertson RP, Davis C, Larsen J, et al. Pancreas and islet
transplantation for patients with diabetes. Diabetes Care
2000; 23: 112–16
Shapiro AM, Lakey JR, Ryan EA, et al. Islet transplantation
in seven patients with type I diabetes mellitus using a gluco-

in seven patients with type I diabetes mellitus using a gluco-
corticoid-free immunosuppressive regimen. N Engl J Med
2000; 343: 230–8
Shapiro JAM, Ryan EA, Paty BW, Lakey JRT. Pancreas and
islet transplantation. In Pickup J, Williams G, eds. Textbook
of Diabetes, 3rd edn, Oxford: Blackwell Scientific Publica-
tions, 2003: 72.1–72.18
Sutherland DER, Gruessner RWG, Dunn DL, et al. Lessons
learned from more than 1000 pancreas transplants at a sin-
gle institution. Ann Surg 2001; 233: 463–501
Sutherland DER, Gruessner RWG, Gruessner AC. Pancreas
transplantation for treatment of diabetes mellitus. World J
Surg 2001; 25: 487–96
Tattersall RB, Gale EAM, eds. Diabetes; Clinical Manage-
ment. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1990
UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) Group. Intensive
blood-glucose control with sulphonylureas or insulin com-
pared with conventional treatment and risk of complications
in patients with type 2 diabetes (UKPDS 33). Lancet 1998;
352: 837–53

in patients with type 2 diabetes (UKPDS 33). Lancet 1998;
352: 837–53
UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) Group. Effect of
intensive blood-glucose control with metformin on compli-
cations in overweight patients with type 2 diabetes (UKPDS
34). Lancet 1998; 352: 854–65
Yki-Jarvinen H. Combination therapies with insulin in type
2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2001; 24: 758–67

43
TREATMENT
Figure 46
Proinsulin. Insulin is produced in the β-cells of the islets of Langerhans by cleavage of the precursor proinsulin into
insulin and C-peptide. Measurement of C-peptide, especially following intravenous injection of 1 mg of glucagon, is a useful
indicator of β-cell function as C-peptide and insulin are secreted in equimolar amounts and the former is minimally extracted
by the liver. This test can be used to differentiate between types 1 and 2 diabetes mellitus in cases of diagnostic confusion
Figure 47
Insulin crystals. Insulin is stored in β-cells as hexamers complexed with zinc. Insulin–zinc hexamers readily form
crystals which are stored in the pancreatic granules. In the blood, insulin is not seen in aggregated forms such as dimers or
hexamers, but as monomers which are formed when insulin granules are liberated

44
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
Met
Trp protein
Proinsulin
Human proinsulin (S–SO3
– )6
Purified human proinsulin
Tryptophan synthetase
proinsulin gene
Insert into E. coli
Protein
production
Separation and
purification
CNBr cleavage and
oxidative sulfitolysis
Folding/Disulfide
bond formation
Enzymatic conversion
Purification
Chimeric proinsulin plasmid
Human insulin + human C-peptide
Biosynthetic human insulin
Trp LE’ Met proinsulin
Figure 48
Insulin for therapeutic use was previously
produced solely from porcine or bovine sources. Human
insulin is now manufactured by two different processes:
enzymatic conversion of porcine to human insulin; and
biosynthesis of human insulin. Porcine and human insulin
differ only in a single residue at the C terminus of the β
chain. Enzymatic conversion involves substitution of the
porcine B30 alanine residue by threonine to produce the
semisynthetic human insulin ‘emp’ (enzymatically modified
porcine).
The biosynthesis of human insulin using

porcine).
The biosynthesis of human insulin using
recombinant-DNA technology involves insertion of a
synthetic gene coding for human proinsulin into a bacterial
plasmid, which is then introduced into a bacterium such as
Escherichia coli. Ultimately, the synthetic gene is transcribed
in quantity and its messenger RNA translated into proinsulin
Figure 49
Escherichia coli distended by biosynthetic
human proinsulin before lysis

45
TREATMENT
INSULIN ASPART (NovoRapid)
INSULIN LISPRO (Humalog)
INSULIN GLULISINE (Apidra)
Biphasic insulin
(fixed mixtures)
Long-acting
insulin analog
Insulin zinc
suspension
Isophane (NPH)
insulin
Insulin zinc suspension
(crystalline)
Soluble insulin
Short-acting insulin
analogs
Biphasic insulin
analogs
HUMAN ACTRAPID (Novo Nordisk)
HUMULIN S (Lilly)
INSUMAN RAPID (Aventis)
HYPURIN PORCINE NEUTRAL (CP)
HYPURIN BOVINE NEUTRAL (CP)
PORK ACTRAPID
HUMAN ULTRATARD
HUMULIN ZN
HUMAN INSULTARD ge
HUMULIN I
INSUMAN BASAL
HYPURIN PORCINE ISOPHANE
HUMAN MONOTARD
HUMULIN LENTE HYPURIN
BOVINE LENTE
GLARGINE (Lantus)
DETEMIR (Levemir)
HUMAN MIXTARD 30
HUMULIN M3
INSUMAN COMB 50
BIPHASIC INSULIN LISPRO
(Humalog Mix 25 and Mix 50)
BIPHASIC INSULIN ASPART
(NovoMix 30)
Figure 50
Over 300 insulin preparations are available worldwide. They may be classified according to their duration of action:

short-acting (soluble, neutral or regular), intermediate-acting (isophane), long-acting (insulin–zinc suspensions), and fixed
mixtures of short- and intermediate-acting (biphasic insulins). Some of the most commonly used insulins are summarized in
this figure. It is preferable for the non-specialist to become familiar with a small number of appropriate insulins and insulin
regimens rather than attempt to know them all

46
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
Figure 51
Modern plastic insulin syringes carry integral fixed needles and are designed to minimize dead space. Recent
advances in needle manufacturing have resulted in very fine needles, which have greatly reduced the discomfort of insulin
injection. Patients usually use the same syringe and needle for several injections
Figure 52
Illustrated here are the Novopen® 3 Classic and
two Novopen Fun insulin pens with an assortment of 3 ml
insulin cartridges, which are inserted into the pens. Such
pens are now the most popular method of administering
insulin. Originally developed for multiple-dose regimens
using short-acting soluble insulin, they are now available
with cartridges of intermediate-acting isophane or fixed
mixtures of insulins for injection twice-daily. The particular
advantages of these pens are convenience, speed and ease of
injection as well as less pain owing to the development of
very fine tipped needles. Disposable insulin pens are also

very fine tipped needles. Disposable insulin pens are also
available.Also shown is the Innovo® insulin doser device that
allows the patient to dial-up the correct dose of insulin and
displays the previous dose and the time passed since its
delivery

47
TREATMENT
Figure 53
Insulin pens with preloaded cartridges are a popular method of insulin administration. The Flexpen® is one such
pen and is a 3 ml preloaded delivery device for NovoMix® 30 and NovoRapid® insulins. It has tactile markings on the dose
delivery button
Figure 54
The Humapen® Luxura insulin pen which has
just been released exemplifies the user-friendly convenience
of modern insulin pens which can be fitted into a jacket
pocket or handbag
Figure 55
This novel pre-filled disposable device
(Innolet®) has a plastic palm-held doser with a large ‘egg-
timer like’ dial for dosing and is particularly useful for
diabetic patients with hand problems or visual impairment

48
Figure 56
Usual sites of insulin administration are the outer thighs, buttocks, upper arms and abdomen, and should be rotated
within each anatomic area as injection into exactly the same site may cause lipid hypertrophy (see Figure 64), which may hinder
insulin absorption. Insulin absorption may vary from one site to another
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS

49
Skin
Fat
Muscle
Figure 57
Insulin injection technique: the modern practice
is to insert the needle vertically into the subcutaneous tissue.
Needles of 8 mm in length are used with a pinch-up
technique except in obese patients, in whom the standard
12-mm needle should be used. When insulin is being
injected without pinch-up into the arms, 6-mm needles are
recommended. It is no longer considered necessary to swab
the skin with alcohol or to withdraw the skin plunger to
check for blood. Care must be taken in thin patients to avoid
intramuscular injection as this will result in more rapid
absorption of insulin
0800
1200 1600 2000
0800
0
30
60
0200
Clock time (hours)
Plasma insulin concentration (mU/l)
0
5
10
Meals
Plasma glucose concentration (mmol/l)
Basal secretion
Figure 58
Physiologic plasma insulin and glucose profiles: in
non-diabetic subjects, basal fasting insulin secretion is very
low and suppresses hepatic glucose production, but meal

low and suppresses hepatic glucose production, but meal
ingestion results in a rapid increase in insulin secretion (shown
here). This tight regulation keeps plasma glucose concen-
trations within a narrow range of about 3.5–7.5mmol/l
(63–135mg/dl). It is this pattern which exogenous insulin
therapy attempts to emulate
0700
1200
0
10
5
15
0200
2300
1900
Clock time (h)
Blood glucose (mmol/l)
Breakfast
Lunch
Dinner
Insulin injection
Normoglycemia
Figure 59
Effect of twice-daily subcutaneous injections of
soluble insulin. Because soluble insulin has a peak effect
2–4 h after injection and a total duration of effect of 8–10 h,
this regimen on its own cannot adequately control glucose;
blood glucose concentrations will rise before the time of the
next injection
TREATMENT

50
Factors that
influence the
rate of insulin
absorption
Route of
insulin injection:
subcutaneous or
intramuscular
Dose,
concentration,
volume and
species of insulin
Insulin physical
state: soluble
or particulate
Hypoglycemia
Ketoacidosis
Smoking
Exercise
Ambient
temperature
Presence
of lipid
hypertrophy
Figure 61
Once insulin has been injected subcutaneously, many factors may influence the rate of its absorption. Patients need
to be made aware of this as such factors may occasionally explain erratic diabetic control
0700
1200
0
10
5
15
0200
2300
1900
Clock time (h)
Blood glucose (mmol/l)
Breakfast
Lunch
Dinner
Insulin injection
Normoglycemia
Twice-daily
intermediate insulin
Twice-daily
intermediate
+ short-acting insulins
Figure 60
Effect of adding twice-daily soluble insulin injections to a regimen based on twice-daily intermediate-acting
(isophane) insulin. Many newly presenting type 1 diabetes mellitus patients who have residual endogenous insulin secretion can

be controlled with twice-daily isophane, two-thirds in the morning and one-third in the evening. However, if postprandial
hyperglycemia is pronounced, soluble insulin can be added to one or both injections. Alternatively, fixed mixtures of soluble
insulin and isophane can be tried
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS

51
Figure 62
This patient is wearing an infuser to receive continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion (CSII) as an adjustable basal
rate of insulin delivery augmented at mealtimes by patient-activated boosts. Patients employing CSII must have access to
comprehensive education on its use, and to centers which can provide supervision by experienced staff and a 24-h telephone
service for advice. Long-term strict control of blood glucose levels can be achieved, but this regimen is not without its problems;
death may occur owing to sudden ketoacidosis if the insulin supply becomes disconnected and infusion site infections may occur
TREATMENT

52
Figure 63
Insulin lipoatrophy manifests as depressed areas
of skin owing to underlying fat atrophy. This was common
before the advent of purified porcine and, more especially,
human insulin. Several rare syndromes of lipoatrophy
associated with diabetes have been described, and are
characterized by insulin-resistant diabetes and absence of
subcutaneous adipose tissue, either generalized or partial.
These syndromes constitute a heterogeneous group, some of
which are congenital and others of which are acquired
Figure 64
This patient has both insulin lipid hypertrophy
and lipoatrophy. The lipid hypertrophy is seen in the lateral
thigh and buttock regions where insulin has been injected. If
the same injection site is used over many years, a soft fatty
dermal nodule, often of considerable size, develops, possibly
owing to the lipogenic action of insulin. Patients should be
discouraged from using such sites as variation in insulin
absorption may occur, leading to erratic control

absorption may occur, leading to erratic control
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS

53
Figure 65
This patient has areas of lipid hypertrophy on both elbows. This is a highly unusual site to encounter lipid
hypertrophy and a highly unusual site for insulin injection. His glycemic control, as a consequence, was very unstable but
improved when he was persuaded to inject elsewhere on a rotational basis
Figure 66
Blood glucose self-monitoring technique.A drop
of blood is applied to a strip inserted into a pen meter. The
drop of blood produces an electrical current proportional to
its glucose concentration. No timing or wiping of the blood
is necessary, although the timing sequence must be started
by hand. Self-monitoring of blood glucose has become an
integral part of modern insulin treatment. It allows patients
to make their own adjustments to insulin dosages and helps
to avoid hypoglycemia. Self-monitoring increases the
patients’ role in their own management and gives a greater
sense of being in control of their condition.There is as yet no

sense of being in control of their condition.There is as yet no
consensus on how often patients should check their blood
glucose, and the role of self-monitoring in type 2 diabetes
mellitus remains in dispute
TREATMENT

54
Figure 68
Many diabetic patients have significant visual
loss due to diabetic retinopathy.
Such loss makes
conventional home blood glucose meters difficult to use.
The newly developed SensoCard Plus meter is a novel
talking blood glucose meter which uses biosensor technology
to measure blood glucose and then produces the result using
synthesized speech
Figure 67
The Optium Xceed meter has the unique ability
to measure both blood glucose and blood ketone levels. Not
only are these functions useful in hospital patients with
diabetic metabolic decompensation, but also they can be
very helpful in allowing diabetic patients in the community
to detect impending ketosis and thus take corrective action
to prevent diabetic ketoacidosis
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
Figure 69
The MiniMed continuous glucose monitoring
system is designed to monitor glucose levels in interstitial
fluid, that are thought to be almost always comparable with

fluid, that are thought to be almost always comparable with
blood glucose levels. A sensor is inserted under the skin of
the anterior abdominal wall and interstitial glucose levels are
sensed every 10 s and averaged over 5 min. Glucose sensors
are worn for a maximum of 3 days and calibrated on the
basis of four or more capillary glucose readings each day.
Data are stored in the monitor and downloaded to an
external computer and viewed in a graphical format

55
0000
–5
0
5
10
15
20
0400
0800
1200
1600
2000
2200
Clock time (h)
Glucose concentration (mmol/l)
Figure 70
This profile shows very stable blood glucose control with most values between 5 and 10 mmol/l (90 and 180 mg/dl)
0000
–5
0
5
10
15
20
0400
0800
1200
1600
2000
2200
Clock time (h)
Glucose concentration (mmol/l)
Figure 71
Data from continuous glucose monitoring may reveal surprising patterns of glucose excursions which could not be
predicted from intermittent self blood glucose monitoring. These profiles show that the patient was frequently hypoglycemic
during the night, while glucose control during the day was poor. Such information can lead to more focused adjustments of
insulin regimens and improvement of overall glycemic load
TREATMENT

56
Figure 72
This patient is wearing a Guardian® RT,
continuous real-time glucose monitor. The sensor measures
interstitial fluid glucose levels providing up to 288 glucose
readings per day. The glucose sensor is connected to a
transmitter that communicates with a monitor using
radiofrequency technology to display real-time glucose
values every 5 minutes on the monitor screen. Alarm
thresholds can be set to alert patients when glucose levels
become too high or too low. Unfortunately, the device is
prohibitively expensive as is the cost of the sensors
Initial dietary advice
(before dietetic assessment)
Have regular meals, avoid fried and
very sugary foods
Eat plenty of vegetables with cereals,
pasta, bread, potato, rice or chapatis
as the main part of each meal
Have meat, eggs, cheese as a small
part of each meal. Fish and pulses
should be alternatives
Drink water or other drinks without sugar
Figure 73
At diagnosis, all diabetic patients need

Drink water or other drinks without sugar
Figure 73
At diagnosis, all diabetic patients need
immediate advice about what they should and should not
eat. This may be given by the family physician, practice or
specialist nurse, or hospital ward staff. It should be kept
simple until a dietician can give more detailed recom-
mendations (see Figure 74)
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS

57
Dietary principles
Type I diabetes mellitus
Type 2 diabetes mellitus
Fat
% energy 
30–35%
Saturated fatty acids 
< 10%
Monounsaturated fatty acids 
10–15%
Polyunsaturated fatty acids 
< 10%
Same principles as for type I
diabetes mellitus
A reduction in energy intake should be
aimed for in an effort to lower body
weight in the obese
Protein
% energy 
10–15%
Salt
Normotensive 
< 6 g/day
Hypertensive 
< 3 g/day
Diabetic foods
None/avoid
Alcohol
Total daily intake
Men 
30 g/3 U
Women 
20 g/2 U
Carbohydrate
% energy 
50–55%
Added sucrose/fructose 
< 25 g/day
Dietary fiber 
> 30 g/day
Tailor dietary recommendations to individual patients' needs,
with special consideration of ethnic minorities
Figure 74
The importance of diet in the treatment of diabetes cannot be overemphasized. Patients and their relatives should
have open access to consultation with a professional dietician. The dietary principles recommended do not differ greatly from

the national recommendations for the general population
TREATMENT

58
Sulfonylureas
Tolbutamide 
1.5–2.0 g 
Divided 
3–8 h
Chlorpropamide 
100–500 mg 
Single 
35 h
Glibenclamide 
2.5–20 mg 
Single or divided 
5 h
Glibornuride 
12.5–75 mg 
Single or divided 
8 h
Glipizide 
2.5–20 mg 
Single or divided 
4 h
Gliclazide 
40–320 mg 
Single or divided 
12 h
Gliquidone 
15–180 mg 
Single or divided 
4 h
Glimepiride 
1–6 mg 
Single 
5–8 h
Meglitinides
Repaglinide 
0.1–16 mg 
Divided 
1 h
Nateglinide 
60–540 mg 
Divided 
1.5 h
Biguanides
Metformin 
1.0–3.0 g 
Divided 
1.5–4.5 h
 
Dose range 
Dose distribution 
Half-life
α-Glucosidase inhibitors
Acarbose 
50–600 mg 
Single or divided 
N/A
Miglitol 
50–300 mg 
Single or divided 
N/A
Thiazolidinediones (glitazones)
Rosiglitazone 
4–8 mg 
Single or divided 
3–4 h
Pioglitazone 
15–45 mg 
Single 
5–6 h
Figure 75
Many drugs are marketed for the treatment of type 2 diabetes, but most centers confine themselves to the use of

one sulfonylurea, metformin and the glitazones with more sporadic use of acarbose and the meglitinides. The United Kingdom
Prospective Diabetes Study has testified to the benefit of the use of metformin alone in obese patients and confirmed the safety
of sulfonylureas. The PROactive study (PROspective pioglitAzone Clinical Trial in macro Vascular Events) of the use of
pioglitazone in patients with type 2 diabetes and evidence of established macrovascular disease showed a lower proportion of
patients reaching the secondary composite end points of all-cause mortality, non-fatal myocardial infarction and stroke with no
effect on the more extensive primary end points. In most countries the meglitinides and α-glucosidase inhibitors are being used
less frequently. Avandamet is a useful combination drug containing rosiglitazone and metformin. Glucophage SR, a slow-release
version of metformin, may be given once daily and may have fewer gastrointestinal side-effects
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS

59
4
Treatment of children and adolescents with
diabetes
The importance of effective strategies for the treat-
ment of diabetes in children and adolescents is accen-
tuated by the knowledge that time-trend data, for
countries where it is available, have demonstrated a
clear increase in incidence of type 1 diabetes mellitus
(DM) in these age groups. Such an increase suggests
changes in environmental factors with the larger
increase in children < 5 years of age suggestive of fac-
tors operative in early life. As alluded to elsewhere,
cases of type 2 DM related to obesity are now being
encountered, especially in high-risk ethnic groups.
Treatment strategies must incorporate knowledge
of developmental milestones and behavioral, physio-
logic, psychologic and social factors that operate in this
age group and impact so strongly on any chronic dis-
ease management program in children. Emotional
problems are common, but controversy exists as to

ease management program in children. Emotional
problems are common, but controversy exists as to
whether these have any long-term sequelae. Some
studies have suggested that the onset of diabetes is
associated with adjustment disorders which seemed to
confer an increased risk of psychiatric problems later
in life. A recent prospective study of adolescents with
type 1 DM from Australia has documented the
exhibition of a broad range of psychiatric diagnoses
10 years after disease onset, with females and adoles-
cents with pre-existing psychologic problems being at
particular risk.
Great skill by experienced teams comprising pedi-
atric diabetic specialist nurses, dieticians, pediatric
endocrinologists and child psychologists is needed to
coordinate the effort to help diabetic children and
their parents manage the diabetic condition. Difficult
behavioral problems do occur in some children
including denial of the disease, manipulative behavior

including denial of the disease, manipulative behavior
and deliberate insulin overdosage and insulin omis-
sion. Frequent admissions with hypoglycemia or
ketoacidosis usually reflect underlying emotional con-
flict. Such problems require a very sensitive approach
to their management.
Most children (and their parents) rapidly become
confident with insulin injections and self blood glucose
monitoring. Older children (aged 8–12 years) are
encouraged to self-inject. Childhood lasts a long time
and, in order to minimize the risk of onset of
microvascular complications, an attempt to achieve
reasonable glycemic control should be made. This is
often not easy to attain especially during puberty
when glycemic control deteriorates. In a comparison of
metabolic control in nearly 3000 children and adoles-
cents with type 1 DM in 18 countries, the mean
HbA1c was 8.6% with wide variation between centers.
The degree of control achieved depends, to a certain

The degree of control achieved depends, to a certain
extent, on many of the factors discussed above and
often a compromise involving the child, the parents
and the diabetologist has to be arrived at. Authoritari-
an approaches, especially during puberty, are likely to
fail.
Total daily insulin requirements in children with
type 1 DM are around 0.8 units/kg/24 h, increasing to
1.0–1.5 units/kg/24 h in mid-puberty. The principles
of insulin therapy in children are broadly similar to
those in adults. For reasons of simplicity or practicabil-
ity, in many countries the standard insulin regimen
consists of a twice-daily injection of a mixture of
short-acting and isophane insulins either free-mixed
into a syringe or, increasingly commonly, as a fixed

60
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
mixture using a pen device. Two-thirds of the total
daily dose is usually given at breakfast and one-third
with the evening meal. A three-injection regimen,
where the evening injection is split into a rapidly act-
ing injection before the evening meal followed by an
isophane injection before bed, is favored in some
countries. More recently, newer preparations of more
rapidly acting insulin analogs (lispro or aspart) with
their protamine retarded counterparts (e.g. lispro/neu-
tral protamine lispro, (Humalog Mix25®) aspart/neu-
tral protamine aspart, NovoMix 30®) have become
very popular and have certain advantages in children
as they can be injected immediately before or even
shortly after eating, the latter mode of administration
allowing adjustment of the dose given according to the
amount of food ingested (or refused).
Towards puberty and early adulthood, a greater
need for flexibility emerges and, as the child becomes

need for flexibility emerges and, as the child becomes
more independent, encouragement should be given to
move towards multiple injection therapy with three
injections of soluble or analog insulin with meals and
twice-daily injections of isophane or a night-time dose
of isophane insulin. Long-acting insulin analogs –
insulin glargine and insulin detemir – are widely used
in adults and are likely to prove useful in the treat-
ment of adolescents particularly with regard to the
prevention of nocturnal hypoglycemia. As in adults a
typical regimen would be an insulin analog injected
three times daily at meal times with long-acting analog
injected once daily to provide a basal insulin supply
usually before bed or at breakfast. At present few data
are available examining the use of detemir in the pedi-
atric population.
In children, who have less subcutaneous fat, the
needle should not penetrate more than 3–5 mm to
avoid intramuscular administration. It may be better to

avoid intramuscular administration. It may be better to
inject rapidly acting insulins into the abdomen where
absorption is faster and delayed-action insulins into
the thigh where absorption is slower. Continuous sub-
cutaneous insulin infusion (CSII) is a perfectly accept-
able method of insulin administration and is increas-
ingly used within the pediatric diabetic population
and has been associated in adolescents with less
reported hypoglycemia, sustained improvements in
HbA1c after 12 months and a lower total daily insulin
dose.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Mortensen HB, Hougaard P. Comparison of metabolic con-
trol in a cross-sectional study of 2873 children and adoles-
cents with IDDM from 18 countries. The Hvidore Study
Group on Childhood Diabetes. Diabetes Care 1997; 20:
714–20
Northam EA, Matthews LK, Anderson PJ, et al. Psychiatric
morbidity and health outcome in type 1 diabetes – perspec-
tives from a prospective longitudinal study. Diabet Med
2005; 22: 152–7

tives from a prospective longitudinal study. Diabet Med
2005; 22: 152–7
Williams RM, Dunger DB. Insulin treatment in children and
adolescents. Acta Paediatr 2004; 93: 440–6

61
5
Diabetes and surgery
It is well recognized, by both patients themselves and
their usual advisors, that the treatment of diabetes in
hospitalized diabetic patients is often suboptimal. A
lack of knowledge of current treatment strategies and
lack of familiarity with newer insulins, pen devices and
newer hypoglycemic agents by ward staff contributes
to substandard care, but can be overcome by the
development, distribution and promotion of good
treatment protocols, devised by the diabetic team to
cover common situations. Many hospitals have now
created in-patient diabetic specialist nurses to facili-
tate this with back-up from the diabetologist to help
with more difficult or unusual cases. This is all the
more important as many patients undergoing surgery
will have diabetes and the metabolic stress of surgical
procedures may lead to adverse outcomes if not prop-
erly managed. Diabetic patients undergoing surgery
are at special risk of hyperglycemia and ketosis, hypo-

are at special risk of hyperglycemia and ketosis, hypo-
glycemia, perioperative complications such as wound
infection, and iatrogenic problems of blood glucose
control.
Factors to consider in the management of diabetic
patients are the severity of surgical trauma and its
duration, the pre-existing diabetes treatment and the
extent of the patient’s endogenous insulin reserves.
Patients with type 1 diabetes and, for practical pur-
poses, those with type 2 diabetes treated with insulin,
are assumed to have no endogenous insulin and hence
will require to be covered during surgery with exoge-
nous insulin. Other patients will only require insulin
therapy for major surgical procedures.
Protocols for the management of diabetes
during surgery need to be simple, practicable, easily
understood and, above all, safe. Avoidance of the pur-
suit of normoglycemia should be advised and it is
perfectly acceptable to recommend a target range for
blood glucose of around 6–10mmol/l (108–180mg/dl).

blood glucose of around 6–10mmol/l (108–180mg/dl).
Glucose levels much above this should be avoided as
they may interfere with the wound healing process or
be associated with increased postoperative infection
rates.
Preoperative assessment is most important in dia-
betic patients undergoing surgery and close liaison
between the anesthetist, surgeon and diabetes team is
highly desirable, if not vital, in most cases. In general
terms, although not always easy to achieve, all patients
undergoing surgery who have diabetes should be oper-
ated on in the morning. The following treatment prin-
ciples apply for type 2 patients not on insulin and for
insulin-treated patients.
TYPE 2 DIABETES NOT ON INSULIN
THERAPY
When pre-existing glycemic control is good and minor
surgery only is planned, breakfast and oral agents are
omitted on the morning of surgery (long-acting
sulfonylureas should be omitted on the day prior to
surgery). Dextrose infusions should be avoided and

surgery). Dextrose infusions should be avoided and
blood glucose checked every 2 hours. Postoperatively,
oral agents may be recommenced at the time of the
next meal. When glycemic control is poor or major
surgery is planned, it is desirable to admit the patient
before the day of operation to optimize blood glucose
control with short- or intermediate-acting insulins. On

62
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
the day of surgery, breakfast is omitted and the surgery
covered with intravenous insulin and glucose (see
later). Postoperatively, subcutaneous insulin is contin-
ued until blood glucose levels are stable when the
patient can restart oral therapy.
PATIENTS ON INSULIN THERAPY
Patients on insulin therapy having anything other than
a minor surgical procedure should, optimally, be admit-
ted prior to the day of planned surgery to allow stabi-
lization of the blood glucose levels. On the day of sur-
gery, which, as stated above, should always be in the
morning, an intravenous infusion of insulin and glucose
should be set up with potassium supplementation.
Most centers utilize a continuous intravenous infusion
of insulin via a pump driving a syringe containing
50 units of soluble insulin made up to 50 ml with nor-
mal saline, with the rate of insulin infusion being deter-
mined by the ambient hourly blood glucose level

mined by the ambient hourly blood glucose level
according to a preset protocol together with a separate
infusion of 5% dextrose with added potassium through
either a separate line or the insulin infusion being
‘piggy-backed’ into the dextrose infusion line.
An alternative regimen is the GKI (glucose–potas-
sium–insulin) regimen whereby 15 units of soluble
insulin with 10 mmol of potassium chloride is added
to a 500 ml bag of 10% dextrose and the mixture is
infused over 5 hours. If blood glucose levels are not
controlled within the target range, then an appropriate
alteration to the amount of insulin delivered must be
effected by substituting a newly prepared bag with a
different insulin dosage. Potassium supplements in
both regimens may need to be altered according to
measured plasma electrolytes.
The intravenous glucose, insulin, potassium regi-
men by whichever method is continued after the oper-
ation until the first postoperative meal when subcuta-

ation until the first postoperative meal when subcuta-
neous insulin is administered and the insulin infusion
continued for a period that will depend on the time
absorption profile of the insulin administered subcuta-
neously.
The above-mentioned protocols cover the broad
generality of situations managed by the non-specialist.
Specialist teams, with extensive experience of the
management of perioperative diabetes, may modify
them according to circumstances at the time.

63
6
Acute complications of diabetes
HYPOGLYCEMIA
Hypoglycemia is the greatest fear of patients treated
with insulin. Hypoglycemia in patients with type 1
diabetes is a major source of disruption to their lives.
It also occurs in patients treated with sulfonylureas,
although to a lesser extent. Over 30% of insulin-
treated diabetic patients experience hypoglycemic
coma at least once in their lives, and approximately 3%
experience frequent and severe episodes. In the Dia-
betes Control and Complications Trial, the incidence
of severe hypoglycemia was much greater and was
approximately three times higher in the intensively
treated group. Severe hypoglycemia occurred more
often during sleep.The main causes are excessive doses
of insulin or sulfonylureas, inadequate or delayed
ingestion of food and sudden or prolonged exercise,
although such factors caused only a minority of
episodes of severe hypoglycemia in the trial.
Death from hypoglycemia is rare and often is asso-

episodes of severe hypoglycemia in the trial.
Death from hypoglycemia is rare and often is asso-
ciated with the excessive use of alcohol or with
deliberate insulin overdose. Unexpected deaths,
thought to be attributable to hypoglycemia, are
reported in young people with type 1 diabetes who are
usually found dead in bed. Such deaths may be caused
by hypoglycemia-induced cardiac dysrhythmia,
although this remains unproven.
Acute hypoglycemia produces autonomic symp-
toms (such as sweating, tremor, palpitations and
hunger) or neuroglycopenic symptoms (impaired cog-
nitive function, such as difficulty in concentrating and
incoordination). If neuroglycopenic symptoms occur
without prior warning of autonomic symptoms,
unconsciousness may develop.
Mild hypoglycemia responds quickly to glucose
ingestion, but semiconscious or unconscious patients
require intravenous dextrose (30 ml of a 20% solution)
followed by oral glucose on recovery of consciousness.

followed by oral glucose on recovery of consciousness.
Intramuscular glucagon (1 mg), which stimulates
hepatic glycogenolysis, is also a useful measure and can
be given by a friend or relative.
In semiconscious patients, a 40% glucose gel
(Glucogel®, formerly Hypostop, BBI Healthcare) can
be smeared inside the cheeks and massaged to produce
mucosal absorption of glucose. Failure to recover con-
sciousness after intravenous glucose may be associated
with cerebral edema and has a poor prognosis. Patients
may respond to intravenous steroids or to mannitol.
Patients experiencing recurrent hypoglycemia need
to liaise with their medical or specialist nursing advi-
sors to determine the cause and to establish appropri-
ate measures of prevention. When patients experience
hypoglycemic unawareness, a strategy of loosening
blood glucose control with strict avoidance of low
blood glucose levels (< 4 mmol/l; 70 mg/dl) is advised
and has been shown to be associated with a resump-

and has been shown to be associated with a resump-
tion of awareness of hypoglycemia.
Recurrent 
hypoglycemia 
and 
hypoglycemic
unawareness pose particular problems for drivers and
for those engaged in certain high-risk occupations, e.g.
operating heavy machinery. Patients should be
advised strictly to avoid such activities until these
problems can be eliminated with the help of the dia-
betic team.

64
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
DIABETIC KETOACIDOSIS AND
HYPEROSMOLAR NON-KETOACIDOTIC
COMA
Diabetic ketoacidosis is the main cause of death in
type 1 diabetic patients under 20 years of age. Its car-
dinal features are hyperketonemia, metabolic acidosis
and hyperglycemia. Although diabetic ketoacidosis
may occur at any age, it is most commonly seen in
younger patients. It is often precipitated by infection
and, more rarely, by another concurrent illness, such as
myocardial infarction. Many cases occur in newly
identified type 1 diabetic patients. Occasionally, it is
precipitated by the deliberate omission of insulin
injections. In many instances, no identifiable cause is
found. Infection is the most common precipitating
cause with new cases of diabetes being the second
most common. Some patients have frequent recurrent
episodes of ketoacidosis of no identifiable cause – they
are usually females under 20 years of age. Deliberate
omission or under-dosage of insulin is probably the

omission or under-dosage of insulin is probably the
cause in such patients. Ketoacidosis can occur in
patients with type 2 diabetes as a consequence of
severe infections and other intercurrent illness.
Diabetic ketoacidosis is characterized clinically by
symptoms of nausea, vomiting, thirst, polyuria and,
occasionally, abdominal pain accompanied by signs of
dehydration, acidotic respiration, ketones on the
breath, hypothermia and altered consciousness.
Detailed biochemical assessment and monitoring (of
urea, electrolytes, glucose and arterial gases) are
mandatory in the management of this condition and a
search should be undertaken for the underlying cause
(by chest radiography or urine and blood cultures, for
example). If a treatable underlying cause is found it
should be treated promptly.
Successful treatment necessitates vigorous fluid
replacement, correction of potassium deficiency, con-
tinuous intravenous insulin infusion, attention to

tinuous intravenous insulin infusion, attention to
acid–base status and treatment of the underlying cause
where identifiable. Fluid replacement is with isotonic
saline until the blood glucose falls below about
14 mmol/l (250 mg/dl), when 5% dextrose is substi-
tuted and infused at a rate of approximately 250 ml/h.
Severe hypernatremia (plasma sodium > 155 mmol/l)
or marked plasma hyperosmolality (> 350 mosm/kg)
may require the use of hypotonic, rather than isotonic,
saline on a short-term basis. Approximately 6–10 liters
of fluid may be required during the first 24 h, with
1 liter of saline being infused every hour for the first
2–3 h. Soluble insulin (Human Actrapid, Novo
Nordisk or Humulin S, Eli Lilly) is given by contin-
uous intravenous infusion usually at an initial rate of
5–10 units/h to produce steady plasma insulin con-
centrations to inhibit lipolysis and hence ketogene-
sis, to inhibit hepatic glucose production and to
enhance disposal of glucose and ketone bodies by

sis, to inhibit hepatic glucose production and to
enhance disposal of glucose and ketone bodies by
peripheral tissues. Hourly capillary blood glucose lev-
els are checked to adjust the insulin infusion rate to
maintain the blood glucose concentration between 5
and 10 mmol/l (90 and 180 mg/dl). The role of bicar-
bonate administration in diabetic ketoacidosis is con-
troversial and unproven, but many advocate its use in
severe acidosis with blood pH levels < 7.0.
Despite these and other measures, the overall mor-
tality from diabetic ketoacidosis is around 7%. Cere-
bral edema, a rare and poorly understood cause of
death in diabetic ketoacidosis, may respond to intra-
venous mannitol or dexamethasone. Hyperosmolar
non-ketoacidotic coma carries an even greater mortal-
ity of around 30% of cases and is characterized by the
insidious development of severe hyperglycemia, with
resultant dehydration, and prerenal uremia unaccom-
panied by ketoacidosis.

resultant dehydration, and prerenal uremia unaccom-
panied by ketoacidosis.
Hyperosmolar non-ketoacidotic coma usually
affects the middle-aged or elderly who have undiag-
nosed type 2 diabetes. Precipitating factors include
infection, diuretic therapy and ingestion of glucose-
rich drinks. Coma is more common in this condition
than in diabetic ketoacidosis. Fluid, electrolyte and
insulin replacement should be similar to that recom-
mended for the treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis. In
addition, there is an increased risk of thromboembolic
disease with this condition. Prophylactic low-dose
heparin (5000 units subcutaneously every 8 h) is often
recommended if patients are immobile, have estab-
lished thromboembolic disease or have other risk fac-
tors. Low molecular weight heparin by once-daily sub-
cutaneous injection is easier to administer. However,
the role of routine prophylactic anticoagulation in dia-
betic hyperglycemic emergencies remains unclear and

betic hyperglycemic emergencies remains unclear and
many advocate anticoagulation with heparin only
when there is definite evidence of thromboembolic
disease.

65
ACUTE COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Cryer PE, Fisher JN, Shamoon H. Hypoglycemia. Diabetes
Care 1994; 17: 734–55
Frier BM, Fisher BM, eds. Hypoglycemia and Diabetes. Lon-
don: Edward Arnold, 1993
Kitabchi AE, Umpierrez GE, Murphy MB, et al. Manage-
ment of hyperglycaemic crises in patients with diabetes. Dia-
betes Care 2001; 24: 131–53
Schade DS, Eaton RP, Alberti KGGM, Johnston DG. Dia-
betic Coma, Ketoacidotic and Hyperosmolar. Albuquerque:
University of New Mexico Press, 1981
Small M, Alzaid A, MacCuish AC. Diabetic hyperosmolar
non-ketoacidotic decompensation. Q J Med 1988; 66: 251–7
Hypoglycemia in diabetes
Greatly feared by diabetic patients
Common in sulfonylurea-treated patients
(especially gilbenclamide)
Treat conscious patients with oral glucose; treat
unconscious patients with intravenous glucose
or intramuscular glucagon
Confusion
Fits
Abnormal behavior
Unconsciousness
Causes 
neuroglycopenic
symptoms
Tremor
Palpitation
Sweating
Hunger
Anxiety
Causes

Unconsciousness
Causes 
neuroglycopenic
symptoms
Tremor
Palpitation
Sweating
Hunger
Anxiety
Causes
autonomic
symptoms
Common in type I diabetes mellitus      
Is responsible for the death of a small percentage
of type I diabetes mellitus patients
Need to identify and correct cause
Figure 76
Hypoglycemia is a major problem for insulin-treated diabetic patients; over 30% of such patients experience
hypoglycemic coma at least once. Around 10% experience coma in any given year and around 3% are incapacitated by frequent
severe episodes. Hypoglycemia is usually due to an excessive dose of insulin, reduced or delayed ingestion of food, or increased
energy expenditure owing to exercise. Identification of the cause, and appropriate remedial action and education, are
mandatory. Patients treated with sulfonylureas frequently experience hypoglycemia

66
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
Hyper-
glycemia
Hyper-
ketonemia
Fluid and
electrolycte
depletion
Metabolic
acidosis
Biochemical
features of
diabetic
ketoacidosis
Figure 78
Diabetic ketoacidosis remains a significant cause of death in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus and is
characterized by marked hyperglycemia, hyperketonemia (usually detected by the presence of ketonuria), a low arterial pH,
and fluid and electrolyte depletion with prerenal uremia. Treatment involves rehydration with saline, low-dose intravenous
insulin infusion, potassium replacement, bicarbonate if arterial pH is < 7.0 and therapy directed at the underlying cause, if
apparent
Figure 77
Hypoglycemia is associated with regional brain activation. Here CMG positron emission tomography (PET) has
been used to measure changes in global and regional brain glucose metabolism. Hypoglycemia has been shown to be associated

with activation of the brain stem, prefrontal cortex and anterior cingulate (yellow/orange indicates regions of increased glucose
uptake and metabolism) and with reduced neuronal activation in the midline occipital cortex and cerebellar vermis (blue)

67
ACUTE COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES
Cerebral
edema
Infection
(especially
pneumonia)
Adult
respiratory
distress
syndrome
Hypovolemic
shock (arterial
thrombosis may
follow correction
of DKA)
Cerebrovascular
accident
Acute
pancreatitis
Mesenteric
arterial
occlusion
Myocardial
infarction
Causes of death
in diabetic
ketoacidosis
Figure 79
Myocardial infarction and infection are the most common causes of death in diabetic ketoacidosis. Cerebral edema
is an uncommon and poorly understood cause of death, and appears to have a predilection for younger patients.
Thromboembolic complications are an important cause of mortality. DKA, diabetic ketoacidosis
Severe
hyper-
glycemia
Absence
of hyper-
ketonemia
Marked
saline depletion
with prerenal
uremia
Absence of
metabolic
acidosis
Biochemical
features of
diabetic
hyperosmolar
non-ketoacidotic
coma
Figure 80
Hyperosmolar non-ketoacidotic coma usually
affects middle-aged or elderly patients with previously

Hyperosmolar non-ketoacidotic coma usually
affects middle-aged or elderly patients with previously
undiagnosed type 2 diabetes mellitus. It is characterized by
marked hyperglycemia (usually > 50 mmol/l; 900 mg/dl) and
prerenal uremia without significant hyperketonemia and
acidosis. Treatment is by fluid replacement, attention to
electrolyte balance and insulin therapy as for diabetic
ketoacidosis, and most patients will not ultimately require
permanent insulin therapy. The condition has a high
mortality owing to a high incidence of serious associated
disorders and complications

69
7
Chronic complications of diabetes
The results of the Diabetes Control and Complica-
tions Trial in the USA have established unequivocally
the relationship between glycemic control and the
incidence or progression of diabetic microvascular
complications. Such complications occur in both type
1 and type 2 diabetic patients, although the latter
patients often die because of major vascular disease
before microvascular complications become advanced.
More than 40% of type 1 diabetic patients will sur-
vive for more than 40 years, half of them without
developing significant microvascular complications.
The United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study
(UKPDS) has also provided pivotal information on the
relationship between glucose control and compli-
cations in type 2 diabetes diabetes mellitus (DM). It
has demonstrated, in a significant way, the beneficial
effect of an improvement in blood glucose control on
subsequent risk of developing specific diabetic
complications.

subsequent risk of developing specific diabetic
complications.
DIABETIC RETINOPATHY
Both the incidence and prevalence of diabetic
retinopathy are highest in type 1 diabetic patients
with an early age of onset of diabetes. However, type 1
diabetic patients do not exhibit retinopathy at presen-
tation, and the likelihood of developing significant dia-
betic eye disease in the first 5 years of the disease is
small.
In contrast, type 2 diabetic patients may have
retinopathy at presentation, presumably because they
have had previously unrecognized type 2 diabetes for
many years. The prevalence of retinopathy increases
with the duration of diabetes. In general, significant
visual impairment is usually caused by proliferative
retinopathy in type 1 diabetes and by maculopathy in
type 2 diabetes.
Background diabetic retinopathy is characterized
by capillary dilatation and occlusion, microaneurysms,
‘blot’ hemorrhages and hard exudates (which are true

‘blot’ hemorrhages and hard exudates (which are true
exudates of lipid-rich material from abnormal vessels).
This picture represents non-proliferative retinopathy
and is not associated with visual loss unless hard exu-
dates become extensive and involve the fovea. Prepro-
liferative lesions, a harbinger of impending new vessel
formation, include cottonwool spots, venous loops and
beading, arterial narrowing and occlusion, and
intraretinal microvascular abnormalities. The latter
consist of abnormal dilated capillaries which are often
leaky.
The importance of the recognition of preprolifera-
tive retinopathy is that it indicates the need for urgent
referral to an ophthalmologist. New vessels originate
from a major vein (occasionally from arteries) and
appear in the retinal periphery or on the optic disc.
They are much less common in type 2 diabetes than in
type 1 diabetes. New vessels have a devastating impact
on vision when they burst and produce sudden pre-

on vision when they burst and produce sudden pre-
retinal or vitreous hemorrhage. Contraction of associ-
ated fibroglial tissue may result in retinal detachment
with resultant loss of vision, which may be profound if
it affects the macula.
Diabetic maculopathy is the most common cause
of visual loss in type 2 diabetes and may be exuda-
tive, edematous or ischemic. If left untreated,

70
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
preproliferative retinopathy, proliferative retinopathy
and maculopathy will all have an appalling prognosis
for the patient’s eyesight. All diabetic patients should
be regularly screened for such changes and referred,
where appropriate,
for specialized ophthalmic
assessment.
Laser photocoagulation can be used to destroy iso-
lated new vessels or to undertake panretinal photoco-
agulation in cases of more severe proliferative
retinopathy. The aim of the panretinal approach is to
reduce retinal ischemia overall, thereby reducing the
stimulus to new vessel formation.
Photocoagulation may also be used for the treat-
ment of macular edema, with focal treatment given for
discrete lesions and diffuse treatment for widespread
capillary leakage and non-perfusion. Vitreoretinal sur-
gery may be performed to treat severe vitreous hem-
orrhage and retinal detachment.
Detection of diabetic retinopathy at an early stage

orrhage and retinal detachment.
Detection of diabetic retinopathy at an early stage
is essential. All diabetic patients should have regular
ophthalmic examination. Screening programs for
retinopathy should be designed to include all patients
with diabetes in an attempt to avoid visual loss. The
combination of direct ophthalmoscopy and digital
retinal photography with measurement of visual acu-
ity is often used. Suitably qualified optometrists have
also been used in some screening programs.
DIABETIC NEPHROPATHY
Diabetic nephropathy is characterized by proteinuria,
decreasing glomerular filtration rate and increasing
blood pressure. In the absence of urinary infection or
other renal disease, proteinuria in the order of
> 0.5 g/day is an indication of established diabetic
nephropathy.
This degree of proteinuria is detectable by dipstick
urine testing. However, it is recognized that this stage
is preceded by a long phase of incipient nephropathy

is preceded by a long phase of incipient nephropathy
associated with microalbuminuria (30–300 mg/day)
that is not detectable on dipstick testing. As microal-
buminuria presages diabetic nephropathy, it allows the
possibility of interventional treatment to slow the rate
of progression of nephropathy.
Histologically, the diabetic kidney is characterized
by increased glomerular volume secondary to base-
ment membrane thickening and mesangial enlarge-
ment, hyaline deposits and glomerular sclerosis due to
mesangial expansion and/or ischemia. Nephropathy is
commonly seen in type 1 diabetic patients, especially
in those who develop diabetes before the age of 15
years. Around 35% of type 1 diabetic patients will
develop nephropathy; the incidence of new cases of
nephropathy declines after approximately 16 years of
diabetes. However, because type 2 diabetes is much
more common, the majority of diabetic patients pro-
ceeding to end-stage renal failure have this form of
diabetes.

ceeding to end-stage renal failure have this form of
diabetes.
The hypertension of diabetic nephropathy appears
to be of renal origin and to occur after the onset of
microalbuminuria. As proteinuria also reflects wide-
spread vascular damage affecting both small and large
vessels, the condition is associated with a poor prog-
nosis unless special strategies are adopted. The causes
of death include not only end-stage renal failure, but
also myocardial infarction, cardiac failure and cere-
brovascular accidents. Type 2 diabetic patients with
nephropathy are more likely to die because of major
vascular disease than uremia.
Peripheral vascular disease,
neuropathy and
retinopathy (usually proliferative) are virtually univer-
sal in diabetic nephropathy. Indeed, if neuropathy and
retinopathy are not present, an alternative cause of the
proteinuria should be sought. The sudden develop-
ment of nephrotic syndrome, a rapid decline in renal
function, hematuria and short duration of type 1 dia-

function, hematuria and short duration of type 1 dia-
betes also indicate the need to seek an alternative
cause, with the use of renal biopsy if necessary. If there
is a marked discrepancy in size between the kidneys on
ultrasound scanning, investigations should be con-
ducted to exclude renal artery stenosis which is com-
mon in diabetes especially in type 2 diabetes with
other evidence of vascular disease. Angiotensin-
converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors should be
avoided in this situation. Regular monitoring of
glomerular filtration rate and plotting the inverse of
serum creatinine against time will give an indication of
the rate of progression of nephropathy; however, this
may be slowed by vigorous treatment of the associated
hypertension, preferably with ACE inhibitors, which
have the additional benefit of reducing intraglomer-
ular pressure.
There is evidence that establishing strict glycemic
control and adopting a diet of moderate protein

There is evidence that establishing strict glycemic
control and adopting a diet of moderate protein
restriction may also retard the progression of estab-
lished nephropathy. With declining renal function,
insulin requirements fall and, as most sulfonylureas

71
CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES
and metformin undergo renal excretion or metabo-
lism, these compounds should not be used in patients
with renal failure; in such cases, insulin treatment is
preferable, although some agents, such as gliclazide,
which are cleared predominantly through the liver
may be relatively safe.
With aggressive treatment of hypertension and
hyperlipidemia and improvement of glycemic control,
the need for renal replacement therapy may be
delayed for several years. However, late referral of dia-
betic patients with advanced diabetic nephropathy to
a nephrologist should be avoided: referral should be
instigated when serum creatinine levels start to rise
and certainly before they reach 300 µmol/l. Renal
physicians prefer to see such patients earlier rather
than later. Although renal transplantation offers the
best method of treatment in suitable patients,
hemodialysis is indicated in patients unsuitable for

best method of treatment in suitable patients,
hemodialysis is indicated in patients unsuitable for
transplantation, while awaiting transplantation or fol-
lowing graft failure. Dialysis may need to be started at
lower creatinine levels than in non-diabetic patients
because of a tendency to increased fluid retention and
volume-dependent hypertension. Vascular access and
arterio-venous fistulae failures are additional problems
for diabetic patients, as is difficulty achieving blood
glucose control during hemodialysis. However, the
prognosis of diabetic patients receiving hemodialysis,
although poorer than in non-diabetics, has improved
dramatically over the past 20 years.
Long-term survival of diabetic patients with con-
tinuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD) is pos-
sible. Survival rates may be lower than in non-diabetic
patients receiving CAPD. Advantages of CAPD
include the facts that vascular access is not required
and that good glycemic control may be achieved by

and that good glycemic control may be achieved by
the intraperitoneal route of insulin.
Renal transplantation is the treatment of choice for
those < 65 years who are free of significant cardiovas-
cular disease, cerebrovascular disease and significant
sepsis, and for whom a suitable donor may be found.
Survival rates for diabetic patients who receive grafts
from living donors are now almost the same as for
non-diabetic patients, while results of cadaver trans-
plantation, although less favorable, have improved
greatly. Histologic changes compatible with diabetic
nephropathy can be detected in most transplanted kid-
neys. In today’s era, many diabetic patients with end-
stage renal failure who require a transplant receive
both a kidney and a pancreas at the same time.
A major Finnish study of 20 005 patients with type
1 diabetes showed that during a follow-up of 35 years
the overall incidence of end-stage renal failure was
only 2.2% at 20 years and 7.8% at 30 years after diag-

only 2.2% at 20 years and 7.8% at 30 years after diag-
nosis. The risk of end-stage renal failure was virtually
zero for the first 15 years after diagnosis. These data
suggest a greatly improved renal outlook for patients
with type 1 diabetes, especially for the under 5s. Over-
all survival has also improved.
DIABETIC NEUROPATHY
Diabetic neuropathy is a heterogeneous disorder that
encompasses a wide range of abnormalities affecting
proximal and distal peripheral sensory and motor
nerves as well as the autonomic nervous system.
Prevalence
The exact prevalence of diabetic neuropathy is
unknown, partly because of difficulties with defini-
tion. Reported prevalence rates vary from 10 to 90% in
diabetic patients. It is known, however, that the risk of
developing neuropathy is directly linked to the dura-
tion of diabetes: after 20 years of diabetes, around 40%
of patients will have neuropathy. In patients attending
a diabetic clinic, 25% reported symptoms, 50% were

a diabetic clinic, 25% reported symptoms, 50% were
found to have neuropathy using a simple clinical test
and almost 90% tested positive with more sophisti-
cated tests. Neuropathy may be present at the time of
diagnosis of type 2 diabetes, but neurologic complica-
tions occur equally in type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Neu-
ropathy may lead to a significant reduction in quality
of life and is a major determinant of foot ulceration
and amputation.
Pathogenesis
The pathogenesis of diabetic neuropathy is unknown,
but there is no doubt that hyperglycemia is an impor-
tant factor. Pathologic studies demonstrate axonal
degeneration with segmental demyelination and
remyelination. Narrowing of the vasa nervorum may
also be contributory. Neurophysiologic studies show
reduced motor and sensory nerve conduction veloci-
ties. Abnormalities of the polyol pathway have been
invoked as a cause of diabetic neuropathy. In animals,
elevated glucose levels in peripheral nerves lead to an

72
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
increased activity of aldose reductase, with consequent
increased concentrations of sorbitol and fructose
accompanied by a decrease in the polyol myoinositol.
This may lead to reduced membrane sodium–
potassium–ATPase activity. It has been postulated that
such changes may be reversed by the use of aldose
reductase inhibitors. Although these agents have been
shown clinically to improve neural conduction
velocity, their role in the treatment of diabetic neu-
ropathy remains to be elucidated. Non-enzymatic
glycosylation of nerve proteins and ischemia may also
be significant factors in the development of diabetic
neuropathy.
Chronic insidious sensory neuropathy
Chronic insidious sensory neuropathy is the most fre-
quently encountered neuropathy in diabetes with
paraesthesiae, discomfort, pain, distal sensory loss, loss
of vibration sense and reduced or absent tendon
reflexes. This type of neuropathy is usually refractory
to treatment.
Acute neuropathy

reflexes. This type of neuropathy is usually refractory
to treatment.
Acute neuropathy
Acute painful neuropathy is relatively uncommon and
usually occurs in the context of poor glycemic control
(or a sudden improvement in glycemic control).
Lower limb pain may be particularly severe, and
accompanied by muscle weakness and wasting. Recov-
ery usually occurs within a year with good control of
the diabetes.
Diabetic mononeuropathy
Diabetic mononeuropathies, affecting single nerves or
their roots, also occur. They are usually of rapid onset
and severe in nature, although eventual recovery is the
rule in most cases. Such features may point to an acute
vascular event as causation rather than chronic meta-
bolic disturbance. Such neuropathies occur mainly in
older patients, usually male. When two or more nerve
palsies occur within a short time frame, mononeuritis
multiplex must be excluded. Truncal radiculopathies,
almost exclusively affecting the arm, are also encoun-

almost exclusively affecting the arm, are also encoun-
tered and cranial nerve lesions are seen relatively fre-
quently. Third nerve palsies occur most commonly,
although fourth, sixth and seventh nerve lesions are
also described.
Proximal motor neuropathy
Proximal motor neuropathy (femoral neuropathy or
diabetic amyotrophy) is a particularly devastating
neurologic complication of diabetes. It can be identi-
fied clinically by certain common features. It primarily
affects the elderly and is of gradual or abrupt onset
beginning with pain in the thighs and hips or buttocks.
Weakness of the proximal muscles of the lower limbs
follows. The condition begins unilaterally but often
spreads bilaterally and is associated with weight loss
and depression. Slow, sometimes incomplete, recovery
usually occurs but may take several months or a year
or more. Electrophysiologic evaluation reveals a lum-
bosacral plexopathy, and the condition is now thought

bosacral plexopathy, and the condition is now thought
to be secondary to a variety of causes that occur more
frequently in diabetes, such as chronic inflammatory
demyelinating polyneuropathy, monoclonal gam-
mopathy and inflammatory vasculitis. If found to be
immune mediated, resolution may be very prompt
with immunotherapy. Mononeuropathies must be
distinguished from entrapment syndromes. Common
entrapment sites in diabetic patients involve median,
ulnar, radial, femoral and lateral cutaneous nerves of
the thigh. Carpal tunnel syndrome occurs twice as
frequently in diabetic patients compared with the nor-
mal population.
Diabetic autonomic neuropathy
Damage to the autonomic nervous system, or auto-
nomic neuropathy, is seen in diabetic patients,
although the exact prevalence is unknown. Tests of
autonomic nerve function often reveal abnormalities
in patients with no symptoms of autonomic dysfunc-
tion. These tests include the heart rate response to the

tion. These tests include the heart rate response to the
Valsalva maneuver, to deep breathing and to moving
from the supine to the erect posture, and the blood
pressure response to sustained handgrip and standing
up. Cardiovascular tests are relatively simple to per-
form, but evaluating the autonomic control of other
systems, such as the gastrointestinal tract and micturi-
tion, is much more complex.
There is a wide spectrum of autonomic symptoms,
including male impotence, postural hypotension, noc-
turnal diarrhea, gustatory sweating, diminished or
absent sweating in the feet and loss of awareness of
acute hypoglycemia. Gastric atony with loss of dia-
betic control in insulin-treated subjects and bladder

73
CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES
enlargement with defective micturition are also
reported. Resting tachycardia is a common sign. Many
studies have suggested that, once symptomatic auto-
nomic neuropathy is present, the prognosis for the
patient is poor.
Treatment of diabetic neuropathy
Various agents, other than simple analgesics, have been
utilized to try to diminish the distressing discomfort
associated with painful diabetic neuropathies. Tricyclic
antidepressants, which have a central action that mod-
ifies pain perception, are widely used and beneficial.
Carbamazepine has been used in diabetic neuropathy.
Other anticonvulsants, such as gabapentin, phenytoin,
lamotrigine, topiramate and pregabalin, are used in the
treatment of painful neuropathy. Gabapentin and pre-
gabalin are well tolerated and often efficacious, while
topiramate, although being effective, may not be so
well tolerated. Other drugs studied and used in the
treatment of painful diabetic neuropathy include lig-

treatment of painful diabetic neuropathy include lig-
nocaine, mexiletine and tramadol.
Non-pharmacologic therapies include nerve stimu-
lation therapies and electrical spinal-cord stimulation.
Tricyclic antidepressants may be viewed as the first
drug of choice with gabapentin a recommended alter-
native.
Despite pharmacologic treatment many
patients continue to experience pain or discomfort
and treatment may be considered successful in
patients who experience a moderate decrease in pain
or improved function. Depletion of axonal neuropep-
tide substance P with capsaicin extracted from chilli
peppers may help in some patients with C-fiber pain.
MAJOR VASCULAR DISEASE
Although microvascular disease is a major concern in
diabetic patients, it should be emphasized that most
patients with long-term type 1 DM and most patients
with type 2 DM will die because of cardiovascular dis-
ease. Diabetic patients, particularly females, have an
excess mortality owing to coronary artery disease com-

excess mortality owing to coronary artery disease com-
pared with the non-diabetic control population. There
is also an increased mortality due to peripheral vascu-
lar disease. Diabetic patients account for around 50%
of all lower-limb amputations.Atheromatous lesions in
diabetic patients are histologically identical to those in
the non-diabetic population, but are more severe and
widespread. Coronary artery disease may progress
more quickly and hence present at a younger age.
Although thrombolysis is effective, diabetic patients
have a higher acute and delayed mortality after acute
myocardial infarction mostly as a result of left ventric-
ular failure. The Diabetes Mellitus Insulin GLucose
infusion in Acute Myocardial Infarction (DIGAMI)
study has suggested that the use of a glucose–insulin
infusion and subsequent insulin treatment may signif-
icantly reduce 1-year mortality. Diabetes may also
cause a specific cardiomyopathy in the absence of
coronary artery disease.

cause a specific cardiomyopathy in the absence of
coronary artery disease.
Although risk factors for microvascular disease that
pertain to the general population are also relevant to
diabetic patients, hemostatic abnormalities (for exam-
ple, decreased fibrinolysis or increased fibrinogen lev-
els), hypertension and hyperlipidemia are particularly
important in the latter. There is continuing debate
over the atherogenic role of hyperinsulinemia and its
relationship to the elevated levels of plasminogen acti-
vator inhibitor type 1 (PAI-1) described in diabetes.
HYPERTENSION
It is now abundantly clear that hypertension is a major
risk factor in the development of diabetic complica-
tions, both macrovascular and microvascular. There-
fore its detection and treatment are of vital impor-
tance in overall diabetic management. Hypertension is
common in diabetes: it affects 10–30% of white
patients with type 1 diabetes and 30–50% of those

common in diabetes: it affects 10–30% of white
patients with type 1 diabetes and 30–50% of those
with type 2 diabetes. It is a major risk factor for stroke
and coronary artery disease, but also aggravates
nephropathy and retinopathy. Blood pressure starts to
rise when microalbuminuria develops, and the close
link between hypertension and nephropathy may be
explained by genetic factors leading to an increased
susceptibility to develop both associated with
increased sodium–lithium counter-transport activity in
red blood cells. It is now postulated that the common
link between obesity, diabetes, hyperlipidemia and
hypertension in type 2 diabetes is insulin resistance
and associated hyperinsulinemia, either inherited or
perhaps acquired through malnutrition in early life.
Occasionally hypertension is associated with renal
artery stenosis, and this should be investigated, and
ACE inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor antagonists
avoided, when this clinical suspicion arises.

74
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
Targets for blood pressure lowering should be
lower than for the non-diabetic population because of
the major adverse effect of hypertension in this group:
a blood pressure of 130/80 should be aimed for and
perhaps even lower in high-risk patients, e.g. those
with nephropathy. The Blood Pressure Control Study
incorporated into the UKPDS demonstrated that a
tight blood pressure control policy achieving a mean
blood pressure of 144/82 gave a reduced risk for any
diabetes-related end point, diabetes-related deaths,
stroke, microvascular disease, heart failure and pro-
gression of retinopathy. It also demonstrated that in
many patients combination therapy was necessary to
achieve this level of blood pressure control. However,
effective blood pressure reduction is likely to be more
achievable than effective blood glucose control.
ACE inhibitors are the first choice to treat diabetic
hypertension, as not only are they effective but also

hypertension, as not only are they effective but also
they delay the progression of diabetic retinopathy and
diabetic nephropathy (perhaps in the latter by reduc-
ing intraglomerular pressure). Such agents include
captopril, enalapril, lisinopril, fosinopril and ramipril.
The effect of ramipril in reducing the rates of death,
myocardial infarction and stroke in a broad range of
high-risk patients, about 40% of whom had diabetes,
was demonstrated in the Heart Outcomes Prevention
Evaluation Study (HOPE study) and is likely to
extend to other drugs in this group.
When ACE inhibitors cannot be tolerated, e.g.
owing to dry cough, then an angiotensin II receptor
antagonist such as losartan, valsartan or irbesartan
should be substituted. Beta-blockers are also helpful
antihypertensive agents, especially post-myocardial
infarct or when there is co-existing angina. They
should be avoided in bronchial asthma or when there
is severe peripheral vascular disease. Bendrofluazide at

is severe peripheral vascular disease. Bendrofluazide at
low dose (2.5 mg/day) effectively lowers blood pres-
sure, but should be avoided in type 2 diabetes for fear
of aggravating hyperglycemia. Indapamide may be a
useful substitute. Calcium-channel blockers and
α-receptor blockers, such as doxazosin are useful add-
on drugs to achieve satisfactory blood pressure con-
trol.
THE DIABETIC FOOT
Foot ulcers are relatively common in patients with dia-
betes occurring in up to 15% of all diabetic patients.
The associated health-care costs are enormous. It has
been estimated that the attributable cost for a
patient’s foot ulcer care is nearly $28 000 during the 2
years after diagnosis. Observational studies suggest
that 6–43% of patients with a diabetic foot ulcer will
ultimately progress to amputation. The costs associ-
ated with this are even more formidable. The tragedy
is that such morbidity and costs result from lesions
that may be prevented by the institution of, and com-

that may be prevented by the institution of, and com-
pliance with, diabetic foot care policies.
The main causes of foot ulceration are neuropathy,
medium and small vessel peripheral vascular disease
and abnormal foot biomechanics. These factors are
frequently compounded by bacterial infection with
organisms such as Staphylococcus aureus and Strepto-
coccus pyogenes, often accompanied by anaerobes such
as Bacteroides species. Neuropathy is thought to be
the main factor in over one-half of ulcers with trauma
occurring as a result of loss of pain sensation. Minimal
trauma, such as a foreign body in the shoes, ill-fitting
shoes or walking barefoot on a hot surface may lead
to devastating effects (see Figures 108 and 109).
Excessive pressure loading on the sole, especially over
the metatarsal heads and heels, predisposes to the
formation of callus which can break down and lead to
ulceration. Indeed callus is an important predictor of
ulceration. Such excess pressure is generated by

ulceration. Such excess pressure is generated by
motor-nerve damage altering the posture of the foot,
limited joint mobility and local deformities including
Charcot arthropathy. Autonomic nerve damage leads
to reduced sweating and a dry skin which may crack
or split more easily allowing the ingress of infection.
Atherosclerotic disease of the peripheral vessels,
especially the small vessels, is common in diabetic
patients and is a predisposing factor in most cases of
diabetic foot ulceration. Ulcers attributable purely to
ischemia are relatively rare and, as neuropathy usually
co-exists, are described as neuro-ischemic as opposed
to the more common neuropathic ulcers where
neuropathy is the critical antecedent factor. When
ulcers are infected they exhibit local signs of inflam-
mation such as erythema, warmth and tenderness,
although such signs might be unimpressive despite
definite infection. Deep-seated infection and osteo-
myelitis are important to diagnose. If bone can be felt

myelitis are important to diagnose. If bone can be felt
when probing an ulcer, osteomyelitis can be assumed.
Deep infection is suggested by the presence of deep
sinuses, a foul discharge and crepitus on palpating the
foot.

75
CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES
It follows from the above discussion that risk fac-
tors for the development of diabetic foot ulcers
include presence of neuropathy (and other microvas-
cular complications), peripheral vascular disease, pre-
vious amputation and foot deformity together with
previous foot ulceration, poor footcare advice and
advanced age.
Management of diabetic foot ulceration is compli-
cated and requires great expertise and experience, par-
ticularly because most, if not all, approaches to treat-
ment are not evidence based. A multidisciplinary
approach is warranted involving, as necessary, dia-
betologists, podiatrists, orthopedic surgeons, vascular
surgeons, microbiologists, primary-care physicians,
nurses and orthotists. Debridement and removal of
slough and necrotic eschar is vital to promote healing.
Surgical debridement may occasionally be necessary
for an extensive lesion. Relief of pressure is a basic
principle of management of all neuropathic ulcers

principle of management of all neuropathic ulcers
using such methods as an insole encased in either a
temporary shoe or plaster cast (total contact cast or
Scotchcast boot). Dressings should be absorbent
enough to deal with wound exudation.A moist wound
environment may be preferable to encourage granula-
tion tissue. Infection must be treated when present but
may be difficult to determine as may be the causative
organism. There is no consensus as to which antibiotic
regimens to use. In the absence of deep infection,
monotherapy with a broad-spectrum antibiotic, such
as co-amoxiclav, is appropriate. Deep ulcers necessi-
tate initial intravenous administration of a combina-
tion of antibiotics, such as ampicillin, flucloxacillin and
metronidazole, changing to oral administration when
the infection seems to be responding. Clindamycin is
useful when there is a suspicion or proven
osteomyelitis as it has good penetration into bone.
Routine radiography may be helpful in showing the

Routine radiography may be helpful in showing the
presence of gas or evidence of osteomyelitis. It often
reveals calcification of the small vessels of the foot.
Osteomyelitis can be confirmed by alternative imaging
techniques such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
or white-cell scanning. In all cases a vascular assess-
ment should be made and amputation may be neces-
sary if there is extensive gangrene or spreading necro-
sis in a toxic patient. Revascularization may be
possible for neuroischemic ulcers.
Many new and experimental treatments for dia-
betic foot ulcers have emerged in recent years.
Dermagraft®, Smith and Nephew (cultured human
dermis) and Apligraf®, Novartis (Graftskin) (bi-lay-
ered bioengineered skin substitute) have been shown
to shorten healing time and to produce a significantly
greater proportion of healed ulcers. Platelet-derived
growth factor (becaplermin) has been used to heal
small low-grade ulcers. Hyperbaric oxygen has been

small low-grade ulcers. Hyperbaric oxygen has been
shown to accelerate the rate of healing and increase
the number of wounds completely healed. Debride-
ment with maggots is simple and effective for cleaning
chronic wounds and initiating granulation. None of
these techniques has become an accepted standard
therapy for the treatment of diabetic foot ulcers and
further assessments of efficacy and cost-effectiveness
are required.
The assessment of foot ulcer risk, the dissemination
of good foot care advice and early and urgent treat-
ment of established ulceration are the mainstays of the
prevention of amputation secondary to diabetic foot
ulcers. Comprehensive screening programs and treat-
ment programs have been shown to reduce the risk of
amputation. Preventative podiatric care should be
given to all patients at risk. Simple measures, such as
the debridement of callus and the fitting of appro-
priate shoes, often with the help of an orthotist, may

priate shoes, often with the help of an orthotist, may
be all that is necessary to prevent one of the most
devastating and feared complications of diabetes,
amputation.
ERECTILE DYSFUNCTION IN DIABETES
In recent years, there has been a seismic change in the
recognition and management of diabetic patients with
erectile dysfunction (ED). Fundamental to this is the
recognition that ED represents a vascular complica-
tion of the disease. Cardiovascular disease increases
the risk of ED, but ED itself is probably a risk factor
for cardiovascular disease. The estimated prevalence of
ED in diabetic populations is of the order of 38–55%
making it one of the most common complications of
diabetes in men. ED in diabetes is most likely to be as
a result of a defect in nitric oxide-mediated smooth-
muscle relaxation as a consequence of autonomic
nerve damage and endothelial dysfunction. Large ves-
sel disease and hypertension may also contribute.
In today’s climate, male diabetic patients with ED

In today’s climate, male diabetic patients with ED
are much more likely to seek advice and treatment.
Every opportunity for them to so do should be made
available and routine enquiry into sexual function,

76
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
especially in older patients, may well be appropriate.
Few investigations are needed. Measuring serum
testosterone might be helpful if sex drive is reduced.
Other endocrine testing should only be undertaken in
the rare situation when a clinical suspicion of hypogo-
nadism exists. A detailed history should be taken to
define the precise problem with sexual function.
If a diabetic male with ED wishes treatment for the
condition, he should be offered an oral agent as first-
line therapy assuming there is no contraindication. It is
fruitless to try and determine whether the ED has a
psychogenic component or not. Phosphodiesterase
inhibitors, such as sildenafil (Viagra®), are the agents
of choice. Inhibition of this enzyme diminishes the
breakdown of nitric oxide via the second messenger
cGMP. Sildenafil only works in the presence of sexual
stimulation and has no effect on libido. It should be
taken in a dose of 50–100 mg 1 hour before planned

taken in a dose of 50–100 mg 1 hour before planned
sexual activity and sexual activity may take place for
about 4 hours after the 1 hour period. The common-
est side-effects are headaches, dyspepsia and flushing.
Sildenafil is not associated with an increased risk of
cardiovascular events, although the resultant sexual
activity may be. Treatment with nitrates is an absolute
contraindication to the use of sildenafil as the combi-
nation may produce profound hypotension. Tempor-
ary visual changes have been reported. The success
rate for sildenafil for the treatment of ED in diabetic
men is about 60%.
Vardenafil and tadalafil are more recently intro-
duced phosphodiesterase inhibitors. Vardenafil is a
useful alternative to sildenafil and may be associated
with a lower frequency of visual disturbance as a side-
effect. It is worth trying when sildenafil has failed.
Tadalafil has a much longer half-life than either silden-
afil or vardenafil.The advantage of this is that is can be

afil or vardenafil.The advantage of this is that is can be
taken several hours before sexual activity rather than
shortly beforehand. Additionally, its efficacy may per-
sist for up to 36 hours after oral dosing.
Apomorphine, a centrally acting inducer of erec-
tions, is an alternative to phosphodiesterase inhibitors.
Nausea is the main side-effect, however, this is much
less frequent with the licensed sublingual preparation.
In those failing to respond to oral agents, erection
may be induced by the intracavernosal injection of
alprostadil (prostaglandin E). However, long-term dis-
continuation rates are high, penile pain is a relatively
common side-effect of such therapy and patients must
be warned of the much more serious complication of
priapism which, if it occurs, necessitates urgent med-
ical attention. An alternative mode of delivery of
alprostadil is by the transurethral routine using a slen-
der applicator to deposit a pellet containing alprostadil

der applicator to deposit a pellet containing alprostadil
in polyethylene glycol. Such therapy, marketed as
MUSE (Medicated Urethral System for Erection) has
been successful in about 65% of diabetic men
although often associated with penile pain. Long-term
usage rates are not high and some men may actually
prefer to inject intracavernosally.
Devices which produce a passive penile tumes-
cence by applying a vacuum via a hand or battery
operated pump are available. Penile engorgement is
maintained using a rubber constriction ring at the base
of the penis. Although rigidity sufficient for vaginal
penetration may be induced in most patients, the qual-
ity of erection may not be as good as that achieved by
pharmacologic methods and many couples may not
find such a technique acceptable for a variety of rea-
sons. For those who have failed to respond to the
above approaches and with careful selection and coun-
seling, the surgical implantation of a penile prosthesis

seling, the surgical implantation of a penile prosthesis
can be a successful treatment for erectile failure.
NON-ALCOHOLIC STEATOHEPATOSIS
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, has recently become
increasingly recognized and may progress to end-stage
liver disease. It is histologically indistinguishable from
the liver damage that is secondary to alcohol abuse,
but occurs in people with no history of alcohol excess.
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease has a wide spectrum
of liver damage ranging from simple steatosis to
steatohepatitis, advanced fibrosis and cirrhosis. The
combination of steatosis, infiltration by mononuclear
or polymorphonuclear cells (or both), and hepatocyte
ballooning and spotty necrosis is known as non-
alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH). Non-alcoholic fatty
liver disease is the most common cause of abnormal
liver blood results among adults in the USA. It is par-
ticularly common in those with combined diabetes
and obesity: in a group of severely obese patients with

and obesity: in a group of severely obese patients with
diabetes, 100% were found to have mild steatosis, 50%
had NASH and 19% had cirrhosis. Insulin resistance
seems to be the most reproducible causative factor in
the development of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
and NASH, and this condition is increasingly viewed
as part of the spectrum of the metabolic syndrome.

77
CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES
Malaise and a sensation of fullness or discomfort in the
right hypochondrium are recognized symptoms when
symptoms exist and hepatomegaly is the only consis-
tent physical sign. Mild to moderate elevation of liver
enzymes is often the only laboratory abnormality and
fatty infiltration of the liver produces a diffuse increase
in echogenicity on ultrasonography as compared with
the kidneys. Liver biopsy provides an ultimate diagno-
sis. No satisfactory drug therapy is available for this
condition, but encouraging results have been obtained
with gemfibrozil, metformin, ursodeoxycholic acid
and glitazones.
THE SKIN IN DIABETES
A variety of disorders of the skin occur in patients with
DM. Some of these conditions are associated with
endocrine or metabolic disorders that may themselves
cause diabetes.
Acanthosis nigricans
This skin manifestation is often missed on examina-
tion, but is, nevertheless, fairly frequently encountered

tion, but is, nevertheless, fairly frequently encountered
in patients with DM especially in those with genetic
syndromes of insulin resistance and the metabolic syn-
drome. It is characterized by a velvety, papillomatous,
usually pigmented, overgrowth of the epidermis and
occurs particularly in the axillae, neck, groin and infra-
mammary areas (Figure 143). It may be caused by
hyperinsulinemia induced stimulation of insulin-like
growth factor (IGF)-1 receptors on keratinocytes.
Necrobiosis lipoidica diabeticorum
Necrobiosis is rare in patients with DM. Although
traditionally thought of as a classical diabetic skin
manifestation, it can also occur in patients without
diabetes. Necrobiosis usually develops in young adults
or in early middle life and is much more common in
women than in men. The skin is the most commonly
affected site and the appearance ranges from early dull
red papules or plaques, through indurated plaques
with skin atrophy often with telangiectactic vessels on

with skin atrophy often with telangiectactic vessels on
a waxy yellowish background to actual skin ulceration
(Figures 137 and 138). Treatment is controversial,
largely unproven and usually ineffective. Intralesional
or topical corticosteroids or excision and skin grafting
may have a limited role.
Diabetic dermopathy
These well circumscribed, atrophic, brownish scars
commonly seen on the shin (‘shin spots’) occur in up
to 50% of diabetic patients (Figure 140) and are also
seen much less frequently in non-diabetic subjects.
Although there is no effective treatment, they tend to
regress over time.
Diabetic bullae
Tense blisters, more common in men than women,
occurring most frequently on the lower legs and feet
occur rarely in diabetic patients (Figure 142). They
appear rapidly and heal after a few weeks.
Other
Other skin conditions encountered in diabetic patients
are diabetic erythema, periungual telangiectasia, dia-
betic thick skin (linked with the formation of

betic thick skin (linked with the formation of
advanced glycation end-products), vitiligo (autoim-
mune destruction of melanocytes, Figure 136), erup-
tive xanthomata (caused by hypertriglyceridemia in
diabetic dyslipidemia, Figures 148 and 149), migratory
necrolytic erythema (associated with glucagonoma
syndrome, Figure 141) and urticarial reactions to
insulin allergy.
RARER MANIFESTATIONS OF DIABETES
MELLITUS
Diabetic cheiroarthropathy
This rheumatic complication of diabetes manifests
itself as limited joint mobility associated with thicken-
ing and tightening of the skin especially noticed on the
dorsal surfaces of the hands. Resultant contraction pre-
vents the affected patient from placing their hand flat
on to a surface and from approximating the palmar
surfaces of the hand – the ‘prayer’ hand sign (Figure
150). Although seen in both adult-onset type 1 and
type 2 diabetes, it is most commonly encountered in
children and young adults with type 1 DM often

type 2 diabetes, it is most commonly encountered in
children and young adults with type 1 DM often
related to poor glycemic control and associated with

78
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
other more specific diabetic complications such as
retinopathy.
Dupuytren’s contracture
Dupuytren’s contracture (Figure 151) has a quoted
prevalence varying between 20 and 63% in DM.
Furthermore, in patients presenting with Dupuytren’s
contracture, a high prevalence of diabetes is found. It
is more commonly found in elderly patients with a
long duration of diabetes and may have an association
with carpal tunnel syndrome.
Adhesive capsulitis of the shoulder
There are numerous reports of an association between
periarthritis of the shoulder – ‘frozen shoulder’ – and
DM and such patients are encountered frequently in
routine diabetic follow-up clinics. This condition is
characterized by pain and limitation of movement of
the shoulder joint, both active and passive. Referral to
a rheumatologist is appropriate.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Aiello LP, Gardner TW, King GL, et al. Diabetic retinopathy.
Diabetes Care 1998; 21: 143–56

Aiello LP, Gardner TW, King GL, et al. Diabetic retinopathy.
Diabetes Care 1998; 21: 143–56
Angulo P. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. N Engl J Med
2002; 346: 1221–31
Archer AG, Watkins PJ, Thomas PK, Sharma AK, Payan J.
The natural history of acute painful diabetic neuropathy. J
Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatr 1983; 46: 491–9
Arkkila PE, Kantola IM, Viikari JS, et al. Dupuytren’s disease
in type 1 diabetic patients: a five-year prospective study. Clin
Exp Rheumatol 1996; 14: 59–65
Barnett AH, Dodson PM. Hypertension and Diabetes. Lon-
don: Science Press Ltd, 1990
Bell DS. Diabetic cardiomyopathy. A unique entity or com-
plication of coronary artery disease? Diabetes Care 1995; 18:
708–14
Bommer J. Attaining long-term survival when treating dia-
betic patients with ESRD by hemodialysis. Adv Ren Replace
Ther 2001; 8: 13–21
British Multicentre Study Group. Photocoagulation for -
proliferative diabetic retinopathy: a randomised controlled

proliferative diabetic retinopathy: a randomised controlled
clinical trial using the zenon arc. Diabetologia 1984; 26:
109–15
Chauhan A, Foote J, Petch MC, Schofield PM. Hyperinsu-
linemia, coronary artery disease and syndrome X. J Am Coll
Cardiol 1994; 23: 364–8
Donnelly R, Emslie-Smith AM, Gardner ID, Morris AD.
ABC of arterial and venous disease: vascular complications
of diabetes. Br Med J 2000; 320: 1062–6
Drury PL. Hypertension. Baillierès Clin Endocrinol Metab
1988; 2: 375–9
Dyck PJ, Thomas PK, Asbury AK, et al. Diabetic Neuropa-
thy. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1987
Early Treatment of Diabetic Retinopathy Study Research
Group. Photocoagulation for diabetic macular oedema. Arch
Ophthalmol 1985; 103: 1796–806
Edmonds ME. The diabetic foot: pathophysiology and treat-
ment. Clin Endocrinol Metab 1993; 15: 889–916
Eldor R, Raz I, Ben Yehuda A, Boulton AJM. New and exper-
imental approaches to treatment of diabetic foot ulcers: a
comprehensive review of emerging treatment strategies.

comprehensive review of emerging treatment strategies.
Diabet Med 2004; 21: 1161–73
Estacio RO, Schrier RW. Diabetic nephropathy: pathogene-
sis, diagnosis, and prevention of progression. Adv Intern Med
2001; 46: 359–408
Ewing DJ, Campbell IW, Clarke BF. The natural history of
diabetic autonomic neuropathy. Q J Med 1980; 193: 95–108
Ferris FL 3rd, Davis MD, Aiello LM. Treatment of diabetic
retinopathy. N Engl J Med 1999; 341: 667–78
Finne P, Reunanen A, Stenman S, et al. Incidence of end-
stage renal disease in patients with Type 1 diabetes. JAMA
2005; 294: 1782–7
Greene DA, Lattimer SA, Sima AAF. Sorbitol, phospho-
inositides and sodium-potassium ATPase in the pathogenesis
of diabetic complications. N Engl J Med 1987; 316: 599–606
Haffner SM. Epidemiology of insulin resistance and its rela-
tion to coronary artery disease. Am J Cardiol 1999; 84:
11J–14J
Ho T, Smiddy WE, Flynn HW Jr. Vitrectomy in the manage-
ment of diabetic eye disease. Surv Ophthalmol 1993; 37:
190–202

ment of diabetic eye disease. Surv Ophthalmol 1993; 37:
190–202
Hutchinson A, McIntosh A, Peters J, et al. Effectiveness of
screening and monitoring tests for diabetic retinopathy – a
systematic review. Diabet Med 2000; 17: 495–506
Jacobson SH, Fryd D, Sutherland DER, Kjellstrand CM.
Treatment of the diabetic patient with end-stage renal fail-
ure. Diabetes Metab Rev 1988; 4: 191–200
Jelinek JE. The skin in diabetes. Diabetic Med 1993; 10:
210–13
Kohner EM, Porta M, eds. Screening for Diabetic Retinopa-
thy in Europe: A Field Guidebook. Copenhagen: WHO
Regional Office for Europe, 1992

79
CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES
Kohner EM. Diabetic retinopathy. Br Med J 1993; 307:
1195–9
Lewis EJ, Hunsicker LG, Pain RP, Rohde RD. The effect of
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition on diabetic
nephropathy. N Engl J Med 1993; 329: 1456–65
Malmberg K. Prospective randomised study of intensive
insulin treatment on long term survival after acute myocar-
dial infarction in patients with diabetes mellitus. GIGAMI
(Diabetes Mellitus, Insulin Glucose Infusion in Acute
Myocardial Infarction) Study Group. Br Med J 1997; 314:
1512–15
McCulloch DK, Young RJ, Prescott RJ, Clarke BF. The natu-
ral history of impotence in diabetic men. Diabetologia 1984;
26: 437–40
Mead A, Burnett S, Davey C. Diabetic retinal screening in
the UK. J R Soc Med 2001; 94: 127–9
Mogensen CE, ed. Microalbuminuria predicts clinical pro-
teinuria and early mortality in maturity-onset diabetes. N
Engl J Med 1984; 310: 356–60
Mogensen CE, ed.The Kidney and Hypertension in Diabetes

Engl J Med 1984; 310: 356–60
Mogensen CE, ed.The Kidney and Hypertension in Diabetes
Mellitus. Boston: Martinus Nijhoff Publishing, 1988
Mogensen CE, Cooper ME. Diabetic renal disease: from
recent studies to improved clinical practice. Diabet Med
2004; 21: 4–17
Passadakis P, Oreopoulos D. Peritoneal dialysis in diabetic
patients. Adv Ren Replace Ther 2001; 8: 22–41
Perez MI, Kohn SR. Cutaneous manifestations of diabetes
mellitus. J Am Acad Dermatol 1994; 30: 519–31
Ramsey SD, Newton K, Blough D, et al. Incidence, out-
comes, and cost of foot ulcers in patients with diabetes. Dia-
betes Care 1999; 22: 382–7
Reaven GM. Role of insulin resistance in human disease.
Diabetes 1988; 37: 1595–607
Scobie IN, MacCuish AC, Barrie T, et al. Serious retinopathy
in a diabetic clinic: prevalence and therapeutic implications.
Lancet 1981; 2: 520–1
Shapiro LM. A prospective study of heart disease in diabetes
mellitus. Q J Med 1984; 209: 55–68
Spruce MC, Potter J, Coppini DV. The pathogenesis of

mellitus. Q J Med 1984; 209: 55–68
Spruce MC, Potter J, Coppini DV. The pathogenesis of
painful diabetic neuropathy: a review. Diabet Med 2003; 20:
88–98
Stern M. Natural history of macrovascular disease in type 2
diabetes. Role of insulin resistance. Diabetes Care 1999; 22
(Suppl 3): c2–5
Taylor KG, ed. Diabetes and the Heart. Tunbridge Wells:
Castle House Publications, 1987
UK Prospective Diabetes Study Group. Tight blood pressure
control and risk of macrovascular and microvascular compli-
cations in type 2 diabetes: UKPDS 38. Br Med J 1998; 317:
703–13
UK Prospective Diabetes Study Group. Efficacy of atenolol
and captopril in reducing risk of macrovascular and
microvascular complications in type 2 diabetes; UKPDS 39.
Br Med J 1998; 317: 713–20
Vinik Al, Park TS, Stansberry KB, Pittenger GL. Diabetic
neuropathies. Diabetologia 2000; 43: 957–73
Watkins PJ. The diabetic foot. Br Med J 2003; 326: 977–9
Young MJ, Boulton AJM, MacLeod AF, et al. A multicentre

Young MJ, Boulton AJM, MacLeod AF, et al. A multicentre
study of the prevalence of diabetic peripheral neuropathy in
the United Kingdom hospital clinic population. Diabetologia
1993; 35: 150–4
Young RJ, Clarke BF. Pain relief in diabetic neuropathy: the
effectiveness of imipramine and related drugs. Diabetic Med
1985; 2: 363–6
Young RJ, Ewing DJ, Clarke BF. Chronic remitting painful
diabetic polyneuropathy. Diabetes Care 1988; 11: 34–40
Yusuf S, Sleight P, Pogue J, et al. Effects of an angiotensin-
converting-enzyme inhibitor, ramipril, oncardiovascular
events in high-risk patients.The Heart Outcomes Prevention
Evaluation Study Investigators. N Engl J Med 2000; 342:
145–53

80
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
Figure 81
Normal fundus of the eye. Appreciation of the
fundal abnormalities seen in diabetes must be based on a
sound knowledge of the normal appearance
Figure 82
Optic atrophy in the DIDMOAD (diabetes
insipidus, diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy and deafness)
syndrome, a rare condition that is usually diagnosed when
type 1 diabetes mellitus (DM) presents in childhood. The
inheritance is autosomal recessive and the diabetes insipidus
tends to develop after the diagnosis of type 1 DM
Figure 
83
Background 
diabetic 
retinopathy 
with
occasional scattered microaneurysms and dot hemorrhages
Figure 84
Fluorescein angiogram of the same area as in
Figure 83 reveals many more abnormalities than can be seen
on the fundal photograph. Widespread microaneurysms
appear as white dots

81
CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES
Figure 85
Severe background diabetic retinopathy includes
venous changes, clusters and large blot hemorrhages, intra-
retinal microvascular abnormalities (IRMA), an early
cottonwool spot and a generally ischemic appearance. This
type of retinopathy is usually a prelude to proliferative change
Figure 86
Fluorescein angiogram of the same area as in
Figure 85 shows the blind ends of occluded small vessels,
widespread capillary leakage and areas of non-perfusion
Figure 87
Serious diabetic retinopathy with venous
irregularities, blot hemorrhages, intraretinal microvascular
abnormalities, large cottonwool spots and extensive areas of
hard exudates
Figure 88
Serious gross peripheral proliferative diabetic
retinopathy includes marked venous changes such as
dilatation and beading

82
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
Figure 89
Circinate exudative retinopathy. The two hard
exudate rings (lateral to the macula) are true exudates due
to leakage from abnormal vessels and are associated with
retinal edema. When hard exudates and retinal edema affect
the macular area, the fovea may become involved, which
may threaten central vision. Laser photocoagulation helps to
prevent such loss of vision
Figure 90
This retinal photograph shows the picture of
diabetic maculopathy with frequent hard exudates around
the macula immediately prior to intravitreal triamcinolone
therapy
Figure 91
Triamcinolone has been inserted into the
vitreous under topical anesthesia
Figure 92
The same retina as in Figure 90 at 3 months post
intravitreal triamcinolone therapy. The changes are not
dramatic, but there is an improvement with partial
resolution of hard exudates around the macula. The role of
intravitreal triamcinolone therapy has not been fully

intravitreal triamcinolone therapy has not been fully
established; however, some retina specialists use it to treat
diabetic macular edema which persists despite laser therapy.
It is not a substitute for laser therapy and one recent study
showed it had only a marginal benefit over the long term,
while increasing the incidence of cataract and glaucoma

83
CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES
Figure 93
Extensive peripheral proliferative retinopathy
with venous beading and blot hemorrhages. New vessels
usually originate from a major vein and adopt a branching
pattern. Proliferative retinopathy is the most common sight-
threatening complication of type 1 diabetes mellitus (DM),
with visual loss being due to breakage of vessels leading to
preretinal or vitreous hemorrhage. It is always accompanied
by other diabetic lesions and is treatable by laser photo-
coagulation. It is less common in type 2 DM (where exudative
maculopathy is the most common cause of visual loss)
Figure 94
Leashes of peripheral new vessels with
associated hemorrhage. These lesions are amenable to laser
photocoagulation
Figure 95
Fluorescein angiogram (a) and fundal
photograph (b) of new vessels at the optic disc, which lead
rapidly to visual loss. If hemorrhage has already occurred,
then visual loss is imminent and urgent laser treatment is

then visual loss is imminent and urgent laser treatment is
indicated. Fluorescein angiography reveals the gross leakage
from the abnormal vessels
Figure 96
Vitreous hemorrhage has occurred despite
extensive laser photocoagulation. The hemorrhage may clear
but, if it fails to do so or recurrent hemorrhage ensues, visual
loss is inevitable and vitreoretinal surgery may be indicated
a
b

84
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
Figure 97
End-stage diabetic retinopathy is characterized by
gross distortion of the retina with extensive fibrous bands.
Uncontrolled new vessels develop a fibrous tissue covering
and expanding fibrous tissue tends to contract, causing retinal
traction and detachment.The result is sudden and unexpected
visual loss. The retinopathy shown here is untreatable
Figure 98
In profoundly ischemic diabetic eyes,
thromboneovascular glaucoma may occur with new vessel
and fibrous tissue proliferation in the angle of the anterior
chamber, which interferes with normal aqueous drainage.
The condition is associated with rubeosis iridis (shown here)
wherein new vessel growth occurs on the iris
Figure 99
A patient undergoing laser photocoagulation for
diabetic retinopathy. A high-energy light beam is focused
through a corneal contact lens onto the target area of the
retina. Laser photocoagulation can be used to destroy

retina. Laser photocoagulation can be used to destroy
specific targets (e.g. peripheral new vessels) or to perform
panretinal photocoagulation
Figure 100
Panretinal laser photocoagulation. The entire
retina is treated except for the macula and papillomacular
bundle, which are essential for central vision. The rationale
for using photocoagulation in proliferative retinopathy is
that it destroys the ischemic areas of retina which produce
vasoproliferative factors that stimulate new vessel growth.
Panretinal photocoagulation may require 1500–2000 burns.
The treatment is well tolerated and divided into several
sessions, and regression of new vessels is usually seen within
3–4 weeks. Once treatment is effective, the results are long-
lasting. In maculopathy, laser treatment is either focused on
discrete lesions or uses a diffuse ‘grid’ treatment in cases of
widespread capillary leakage and non-perfusion. However,
treatment is less effective and the long-term outlook is not
as good

85
CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES
Figure 101
Severe vitreous hemorrhage may lead to
secondary retinal detachment. Although vitrectomy may be
performed electively for severe vitreous hemorrhage alone,
urgent surgery is required for operable retinal detachment.
Vitreoretinal microsurgery requires a closed intraocular
approach (shown here). An operating microscope allows
precise intraocular manipulation to remove the vitreous and
its contained hemorrhage, which is replaced with saline and
followed by endolaser photocoagulation to prevent both
further detachment and subsequent neovascularization
Is there evidence of:
Vitreous hemorrhage
Neovascular glaucoma
Indications for and urgency of
referral to an ophthalmologist
Is there evidence of:
Fall in visual acuity (2 lines or more on Snellen chart)
Established maculopathy (edema of macula, hard exudates on macula)
New vessels (at periphery or disc)
Rubeosis iridis
Advanced diabetic retinopathy (e.g. retinal detachment)

Rubeosis iridis
Advanced diabetic retinopathy (e.g. retinal detachment)
Is there evidence of:
Hard exudates close to macula
Florid and increasing number of retinal hemorrhages
Preproliferative changes
Is there evidence of:
Cataract
Immediate referral to
an ophthalmologist
Urgent referral to an
ophthalmologist
(within 1 week)
Non-urgent referral to
an ophthalmologist
(within a few weeks)
Routine referral to an
ophthalmologist
(within a few months)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Figure 102
Once diabetic retinopathy has been identified, referral to an ophthalmologist may be indicated. This table shows
the types of diabetic eye disease requiring such referral and the urgency with which it should be undertaken

86
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
A classification of diabetic neuropathies
Symmetrical polyneuropathies
Symmetrical diffuse sensorimotor neuropathy
Painful small-fiber neuropathy
Acute painful diabetic polyneuropathy
Autonomic neuropathy
Focal and multifocal neuropathy
Entrapment and compression neuropathies
Cranial nerve palsies
Proximal motor neuropathy
(Diabetic amyotrophy)
Hyperglycemic neuropathy
Figure 103
Diabetic neuropathy is a common and often
disabling complication of diabetes. Distal symmetric
polyneuropathy is the most common form of diabetic
neuropathy and can be either sensory or motor and involve
small fibers, large fibers or both. Large-fiber neuropathies
can involve sensory or motor nerves or both resulting in
abnormalities of motor function, vibration perception,
position sense and cold thermal perception with commonly
a ‘glove and stocking’ distribution of sensory loss. Small-fiber
neuropathy is manifest by pain and paraesthesiae but may

neuropathy is manifest by pain and paraesthesiae but may
develop into a chronic painful neuropathy. Mononeuro-
pathies and entrapment syndromes are common. Proximal
motor neuropathies (diabetic amyotrophy) have more
complex etiologies but are usually associated with great pain
and disability. Autonomic neuropathy is rare and leads to a
wide variety of symptoms correlating with the affected
autonomic nerve damage. After 20 years of diabetes, around
40% of patients will have diabetic neuropathy
Figure 104
Transverse semi-thin sections of resin-
embedded sural nerve biopsy specimens stained with thionin
and acridine orange. (a) appearance of a normal nerve. (b)
nerve from a patient with diabetic neuropathy shows loss of
myelinated nerve fibers and the presence of regenerative
clusters. The walls of the endoneural capillaries are
thickened. Diabetic neuropathy is a common complication
that usually manifests as a sensory, motor or combined

that usually manifests as a sensory, motor or combined
symmetrical polyneuropathy. Acute painful neuropathy and
diabetic amyotrophy both cause acute pain in the thighs or
legs associated with muscle wasting and weight loss. Painful
neuropathy may respond to tricyclic drugs, especially
amitriptyline, or anticonvulsants, such as gabapentin
a
b

87
CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES
Figure 105
Diabetic right third cranial nerve palsy.The right
eye is deviated outwards and downwards, and there is
associated ptosis. Pupillary sparing is often encountered.Third
nerve palsy is the most commonly seen cranial neuropathy of
diabetes, although fourth, sixth and seventh nerve lesions have
also been reported as well as intercostal and phrenic nerve
lesions. These lesions usually improve over time
Figure 106
This diabetic patient has an ulnar neuropathy.
Such entrapment neuropathies are commonly seen in
diabetic patients, the commonest being carpal tunnel
syndrome. It has been postulated that diabetic nerves may be
more susceptible to mechanical injury
Sudomotor
• diabetic anhydrosis
• gustatory sweating
Respiratory
• respiratory arrest
Gastrointestinal
• impaired esophageal motility
• gastric atony
• diarrhea
• colonic atony
• enlarged gallbladder
Pupillary abnormalities
• reduced resting diameter
• delayed or absent response

Pupillary abnormalities
• reduced resting diameter
• delayed or absent response
 to light
• diminished hippus
Cardiovascular
• postural hypotension
• painless myocardial infarction
• resting tachycardia
• loss of heart rate variation
Urogenital
• bladder dysfunction
• impotence
• retrograde ejaculation
• loss of testicular sensation
Hypoglycemic unawareness
• decreased catecholamine release
 with loss of warning symptoms of
 hypoglycemia
• decreased pancreatic glucagon
 and pancreatic polypeptide release
Vasomotor
• loss of skin vasomotor responses
   peripheral vascular changes
   osteopathy
   Charcot arthropathy
• dependent edema
Figure 107
Clinical features of diabetic autonomic neuropathy. Many diabetic patients have evidence of autonomic
dysfunction, but very few have autonomic symptoms. The most prominent symptom is postural hypotension. Erectile
dysfunction, common in diabetic men, is not always due to autonomic neuropathy. Late manifestations other than postural

hypotension include gustatory sweating, diabetic diarrhea, gastric atony and reduced awareness of hypoglycemia. Symptomatic
autonomic neuropathy may be associated with a poor prognosis

88
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
Figure 108
This diabetic patient had known diabetic
neuropathy and had been repeatedly given foot care advice
in his diabetes center. Despite this, he walked over a hot
surface in a Mediterranean country in a summer month. By
the time he realized that there was a problem he had
sustained extensive burn injuries to both feet requiring
urgent medical attention
Figure 109
In spite of his diabetes and neuropathy and with
good care from the podiatrist, this patient’s burns healed
remarkably quickly, fortunately with no adverse sequelae
a
b
Figure 110
Intractable vomiting due to diabetic gastroparesis is
notoriously difficult to treat. This patient was successfully treated by
the surgical implantation of the EnterraTM Gastric Neurostimulator
(GES) system (Medtronic Inc, Minneapolis, USA). This novel
experimental approach may prove to be an effective treatment strategy
in such rare but difficult-to-treat patients

89
CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES
Figure 111
A vacuum system for management of diabetic impotence. Placing the cylinder over the penis and creating a
vacuum with the pump produces an erection which can be maintained by placing constrictor rings over the base of the penis.
Studies have shown that many patients prefer this non-invasive technique to other, more invasive, methods
GMP
Guanylate
cyclase
cGMP
Blood
vessels
in penis
dilate
Sildenafil is a potent
and selective
inhibitor of PDE 5
Erection
PDE 5
GTP
Nitric oxide
Sexual
stimulation
Figure 112
Oral treatment of erectile dysfunction with sildenafil is effective in about 60% of patients with diabetes. Sildenafil
selectively inhibits phosphodiesterase type 5 (PDE 5), thereby increasing levels of cyclic GMP within the corpora cavernosa.
This enhances the natural erectile response to sexual stimulation

90
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
Injection sites
(shaded areas)
Cross-section of
penis showing
injection correctly
placed in corpus
cavernosum
Figure 113
Erectile dysfunction in diabetes may be treated by self-injection of the vasoactive drug alprostadil (Caverject,
Pharmacia, Peapack, NJ, USA) prostaglandin E1 into the corpus cavernosum of the penis. The resultant smooth muscle
relaxation allows increased blood flow into the penis, and penile erection will occur whether or not sexual stimulation is present

91
CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES
Collar
Button
cm
Stem
Medicated pellet
Figure 114
An alternative method of administering alprostadil is by transurethral application of a narrow (1.4 mm) pellet of
synthetic prostaglandin E1 directly into the male urethra. Although this removes the need to inject alprostadil, there is still an
incidence of penile pain, and controversy exists as to the efficacy of this procedure
Figure 115
Hyalin deposition in the glomerular tuft in a patient with
diabetic glomerulopathy. Other characteristic histopathologic changes of
diabetic nephropathy are an increase in glomerular volume, basement
membrane thickening and diffuse mesangial enlargement (often with
nodular periodic acid-Schiff-positive lesions). Diabetic nephropathy
develops in around 35% of type 1 diabetes mellitus (DM) cases and in less
than 20% of type 2 DM cases. It is defined as persistent proteinuria (albumin
excretion rate > 300 mg/day) associated with hypertension and a falling

excretion rate > 300 mg/day) associated with hypertension and a falling
glomerular filtration rate. Established nephropathy is preceded by years of
microalbuminuria (albumin excretion rate 30–300 mg/day) which is
negative on reagent-strip testing for albumin. Vigorous control of blood
pressure and the use of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors have been
shown to delay the rate of progression of diabetic nephropathy. Periodic acid-
Schiff stain

92
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
5
4
3
2
1
0
Time (months)
Inverse of serum creatinine
(µmol/l)1/Cr × 103
50
20
30
10
0
40
Figure 116
Once renal failure has become established in diabetes, there is an inexorable decline in renal function which, if
untreated, leads to end-stage renal failure. The decline in renal function is linear when plotted as the inverse of serum creatinine
over time. Modern treatment strategies attempt to slow the deterioration of renal function by vigorous anti-hypertensive
regimens. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors may be especially effective because they reduce intraglomerular pressure
and, unless renal failure is advanced, it is still worthwhile to attempt to achieve improved glycemic control
Figure 117
This neuropathic ulcer on the medial aspect of the foot in a diabetic patient shows the characteristic punched-
out appearance on heavily calloused skin. The neuropathic foot is numb, warm and dry with palpable pulses. Charcot

arthropathy complicates the neuropathic foot and presents with warmth, swelling and redness (shown here). Ulceration occurs
at areas of high pressure in the deformed foot, especially over the metatarsal heads. Minor trauma such as ill-fitting or new
shoes, or the presence of a small undetected object in the shoe, can result in serious foot ulceration. Treatment is by bedrest,
debridement and appropriate antibiotics to treat secondary infection. Special shoes and plaster casts (to allow mobility while
taking pressure off the ulcer) are also useful

93
CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES
Figure 118
Deeply penetrating diabetic neuropathic ulcer over the metatarsal head caused by a foreign body. Foot education,
especially in those patients with documented neuropathy, is essential for preventing such lesions and should be undertaken by
chiropodists, diabetic specialist nurses and diabetic physicians. Diabetic patients should not put their feet in front of fires or on
radiators. Their feet should also be regularly inspected for early ulceration and their shoes carefully checked for foreign objects
before being worn
Figure 119
Three radiographs of the same neuropathic foot taken 1 month apart. Progressive damage to the foot has led to
complete disorganization of the midtarsal joints without osteoporosis. These are typical appearances of a Charcot joint

94
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
Figure 120
Radiographs of the feet of a diabetic patient
showing a neuropathic ulcer over the metatarsal heads of the
left foot. Destruction of the left second metatarsal head and
associated soft-tissue swelling are secondary to osteomyelitis
complicating the ulcer. A fracture on the base of the fifth
metatarsal is also present. The right foot shows Charcot
disorganization of the midtarsal joints
Figure 121
Osteomyelitis in the diabetic foot with
destruction of the base of the third metatarsal (right) and a
periosteal reaction in the shafts of the adjacent metatarsals
accompanied by osteoporosis
Figure 122
Sagittal magnetic resonance image of the hind
foot of a diabetic patient showing marrow edema of the
calcaneus consistent with acute osteomyelitis. There is also
fluid deep to the plantar fascia consistent with cellulitis. An
ankle effusion is also present
Figure 123
Magnetic resonance image of a diabetic foot

ankle effusion is also present
Figure 123
Magnetic resonance image of a diabetic foot
showing disorganization of the talo-calcaneonavicular joint
with erosions of the articular surface. Such appearances in a
diabetic patient are typical of a Charcot joint

95
CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES
Figure 124
The reduction of weight-bearing forces is an
essential part of the treatment of significant neuropathic
ulceration and can be achieved, on a short-term basis, by the
use of a total-contact lightweight plaster cast designed to
unload pressure from the ulcer and other vulnerable areas
while allowing continued mobility. For the long term,
however, equal redistribution of weight-bearing forces over
the sole of the foot is achieved by the use of special footwear
and insoles
Figure 125
Off-loading pressure from diabetic foot ulcers
is essential to allow healing. Total contact plaster casts may
be used, but are not free from problems. A more recent
alternative is the Aircast Pneumatic Walkerwith a Diabetic
Conversion Kit. It is a light-weight removable plastic brace
lined with inflatable chambers to promote off-loading.
Experience to date has shown that such a boot greatly
increases the immediate off-loading capacity of the diabetic

increases the immediate off-loading capacity of the diabetic
foot clinic
Figure 126
A topical preparation of becaplermin (Regranex) has been recently introduced as an adjunct in the treatment of
full-thickness, neuropathic, diabetic foot ulcers. Becaplermin is recombinant human platelet-derived growth factor. Experience
to date with this product is limited and it is very expensive. Accurate cost–benefit analyses are awaited

96
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
Figure 127
Distal gangrene in a diabetic ischemic foot
(dorsal view)
Figure 128
Plantar view of the same foot as in Figure 127
shows the common diabetic complications of ischemia and
neuropathy, both of which may lead to ulceration. The
ischemic foot is cold, pulseless and subject to rest pain,
ulceration and gangrene (shown here). Ischemic ulceration
usually affects the margins of the foot and may be amenable
to angioplasty or reconstructive arterial surgery

97
CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES
Figure 129
The same foot as in Figures 127 and 128 after
amputation of the second toe. A good result has been
obtained. However, a large proportion of diabetic patients
with critical ischemia or gangrene of the lower limbs
undergo major amputation. Thus, the importance of
adequate screening and preventive measures to avoid these
operations cannot be overemphasized
Figure 130
Digital arterial calcification in a diabetic foot.
Peripheral vascular disease is a particularly common vascular
complication of diabetes and about half of all lower limb
amputations involve diabetic patients

98
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
Figure 131
Angiogram showing occlusion of the right
popliteal artery at the adductor canal in a diabetic patient
with peripheral vascular disease (left). There are many
collateral vessels and the artery reconstitutes distally below
the knee. The opposite side (right), which is normal, is
shown for comparison
Figure 132
Calcification accompanying medial sclerosis of
the distal lower limb arteries. In diabetes, the distal blood
vessels are often affected by both atheroma and medial
sclerosis with calcification. This must be borne in mind if
reconstructive vascular surgery or percutaneous transluminal
balloon angioplasty is contemplated for symptomatic
peripheral vascular disease. The initial success rate with
angioplasty is reduced in diabetic patients

99
CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES
Figure 133
Bone scan of the spine (posterior view) in a
poorly controlled type 2 diabetes mellitus patient shows the
florid increase in activity in adjacent vertebrae typical of
osteomyelitis
Figure 134
Bone scan showing osteoporotic vertebral
collapse in a patient with type 1 diabetes mellitus, which has
been associated with a generalized reduction in bone density
(diabetic osteopenia). It is probably more common in those
patients exhibiting poor metabolic control and is due to
reduced bone formation rather than increased resorption. A
slightly increased risk of susceptibility to fracture results
from this abnormality

100
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
The skin in diabetes
Necrobiosis lipoidica diabeticorum
Diabetic dermopathy
Diabetic bullae
Bacterial and Candida infection
Acanthosis nigricans
Vitiligo
Eruptive xanthomata
Necrolytic migratory erythema
Insulin allergy
Lipoatrophy
Lipohypertrophy
Figure 135
Many abnormalities of the skin are found in
diabetic patients. Some may not be specific to diabetes.
Acanthosis nigricans is a skin manifestation of insulin
resistant states, while vitiligo is a cutaneous marker of
autoimmunity. Eruptive xanthomata are associated with
significant hypertriglyceridemia.
Necrolytic migratory
erythema occurs in patients with a glucagonoma and
associated diabetes and is very rare. The rashes of insulin
allergy, lipoatrophy and lipohypertrophy are all associated
with exogenous insulin administration
Figure 136
Vitiligo, autoimmune destruction of melanocytes, is commonly seen in patients with type 1 diabetes, itself an
autoimmune condition

101
CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES
Figure 137
A typical lesion of necrobiosis lipoidica diabeticorum on the shin. These lesions are usually non-scaling plaques
with yellow atrophic centers and an erythematous edge, and predominantly affect diabetic women. They vary considerably in
size, and are often multiple and bilateral. Necrobiosis may occur in non-diabetic subjects
Figure 138
Necrobiosis may become severe and ulcerative, causing great distress in affected patients. Spontaneous regression
may occur and treatment tends to be unsatisfactory. Skin grafts may become complicated by recurrence within the graft or at
an adjacent site

102
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
Figure 139
Granuloma annulare. Although this skin condition is occasionally seen in diabetic patients, several large studies
have failed to reveal a significant association between the two disorders, both of which are relatively common
Figure 140
Diabetic dermopathy. These pigmented pretibial patches are often seen in diabetic patients, but are not
pathognomonic of the disease. There is a male preponderance and the lesions are discrete, atrophic, scaly or hyperpigmented.
The underlying cause is not known

103
CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES
Figure 141
Migratory necrolytic erythema. This rash is
associated with glucagon-secreting pancreatic tumors (or
occasionally zinc deficiency). Such rashes tend to wax and
wane in cycles of 1–2 weeks. Diabetes is presumed to be due
to increased glucagon-stimulated hepatic gluconeogenesis.
Weight loss, diarrhea and mood changes are frequent
features, but death is usually due to massive venous
thrombosis. Treatment is by zinc supplementation, or
somatostatin or a somatostatin analog
Figure 142
Bullous lesions rarely occur in diabetes, and can
only be diagnosed when other bullous disorders have been
excluded. They usually occur suddenly with no obvious
history of trauma and may take a long time to heal. The
lower legs and feet are usually affected, and there is a male
preponderance

104
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
Figure 143
Acanthosis nigricans is uncommon. These
brown hyperkeratotic plaques with a velvety surface occur
most frequently in the axillae and flexures, and on the neck.
Acanthosis is associated with insulin resistance caused by
genetic defects in the insulin receptor or postreceptor
function, or the presence of antibodies to the insulin
receptor
Figure 144
Candidiasis is a common fungal infection in
diabetic patients. Although particularly common in the
vagina or perineum (pruritus vulvae), under the breasts
(intertrigo) and on the tip of the penis (balanitis), it may
occur elsewhere. The yeasts thrive in glucose-containing
media and, hence, control of blood-glucose levels helps to
eradicate this troublesome infection. Antifungal creams may
be necessary until glucose levels are controlled, but oral
antifungal agents are rarely required
Figure 145
Balanitis secondary to diabetes mellitus is a
candidal infection of the distal end of the penis and is

candidal infection of the distal end of the penis and is
common at the time of presentation of diabetes in men

105
CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES
Figure 146
Severe bacterial infection in a poorly
controlled diabetic patient. Although it is widely believed
that diabetic patients are more prone to infection than non-
diabetic subjects, it is unclear whether diabetic patients have
an increase in the rate of infection in general. Diabetic
patients are susceptible to certain infections, including
tuberculosis, urinary tract infections and infections due to
unusual micro-organisms such as osteomyelitis, mucor-
mycosis and enterococcal meningitis. Diabetes is thought to
impair several aspects of cellular function necessary to
combat infection
Figure 147
Malignant otitis externa. This infection, which
can be extremely serious, is almost always due to
Pseudomonas species, as was the case here. Affected patients
usually have poorly controlled diabetes. This elderly diabetic
patient has a seventh cranial nerve palsy as a complication.
Antipseudomonal antibiotics and an early surgical opinion

Antipseudomonal antibiotics and an early surgical opinion
are advised
Figure 148
Eruptive xanthomata.
Type V hyper-
lipoproteinemia with an increase in very-low-density
lipoproteins (VLDLs) and chylomicrons is often associated
with glucose intolerance. This lipoprotein abnormality is
accentuated by obesity and alcohol consumption, and may
lead to acute pancreatitis and peripheral neuropathy

106
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
Figure 149
Massive eruptive xanthomata in a young man
with type 2 diabetes mellitus
Figure 150
Diabetic cheiroarthropathy or limited joint
mobility is characterized by an inability to extend fully the
metacarpophalangeal and proximal interphalangeal joints
when the tips of the fingers and palms of the hands are
opposed in the so-called prayer sign. Although it may be
seen in adult-onset type 1 and 2 diabetes mellitus (DM), it
is most commonly seen in children and young adults with
type 1 DM. The development of this abnormality is linked
to the duration of diabetes. When present, other diabetic
complications are likely to coexist


107
CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES
Figure 151
Dupuytren’s contracture is common in patients with diabetes mellitus. Conversely, in patients presenting with
Dupuytren’s contracture, a high prevalence of diabetes is found. The exact nature of the link between the two conditions
remains unclear

108
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
Figure 152
Macrosomic baby of a diabetic mother. In dia-
betic women, blood concentrations of fuel substrates (glu-
cose, amino acids and fatty acids) are raised and their deliv-
ery to the fetus increased. The elevated glucose and
amino-acid levels stimulate fetal β-cells to hypersecrete
insulin. The increased insulin secretion and nutrient avail-
ability promote fetal growth which, in turn, leads to macro-
somia. Vaginal delivery may be impossible in cases of gross
macrosomia. Strict glycemic control is mandatory in diabetic
pregnancy and requires frequent attendance at a joint
obstetric/antenatal clinic. The increased motivation of preg-
nancy appears to help most diabetic mothers achieve excel-
lent diabetic control

109
8
Diabetic dyslipidemia
Lipid disorders assume a position of utmost impor-
tance in patients with diabetes because of the high risk
of macrovascular disease in this condition. Patients
with well controlled type 1 diabetes mellitus (DM)
have lipoprotein concentrations similar to the back-
ground non-diabetic population. With poor control,
increased concentrations of triglyceride-rich lipopro-
teins are seen giving rise to hypertriglyceridemia. The
most common lipoprotein abnormality in type 2 dia-
betes is an elevation in triglycerides and very-low-den-
sity lipoprotein (VLDL) caused by an overproduction
of VLDL triglyceride. Lipoprotein lipase activity is
probably decreased in type 2 diabetes, possibly as a
manifestation of insulin resistance, and this may be a
direct cause of elevated VLDL levels. No consistent
changes in low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol
are seen in type 2 diabetes, but a number of potential-
ly atherogenic changes in LDL composition have been

ly atherogenic changes in LDL composition have been
observed particularly a predominance of small dense
LDL particles. The finding of decreased high-density
lipoprotein (HDL) concentrations is very prevalent in
type 2 diabetes adding to the atherogenic lipid profile
of this disorder. No consistent change in lipoprotein a
(Lp(a)) concentrations has been found in type 2
diabetes.
Evidence is accumulating that patients with type 2
DM benefit at least as much as non-diabetic subjects
from statin therapy. Simvastatin treated patients with
diabetes in the Scandinavian Simvastatin Survival
Study (4S Trial) exhibited reductions in major coro-
nary events and revascularization procedures of 42%
and 48%, respectively. In the Cholesterol and Recur-
rent Events Trial (CARE), pravastatin therapy reduced
the incidence of recurrent coronary heart disease
(CHD) events (CHD death, non-fatal myocardial
infarction, coronary artery bypass graft and revascular-

infarction, coronary artery bypass graft and revascular-
ization) by 25%. There were 586 patients with dia-
betes in this study. In the Veterans Affairs HDL Inter-
vention Trial (VA-HIT), gemfibrozil was used as
secondary prevention. Patients had documented CHD
with low HDL cholesterol levels and the aim was to
study the effect of gemfibrozil on the risk of recurrent
CHD events. About half of the patients had either
type 2 DM or abdominal obesity and hyperinsuline-
mia (insulin resistance/metabolic syndrome). Gemfi-
brozil reduced the risk of myocardial infarction and
CHD-related mortality by 22% without any lowering
of LDL cholesterol.
The Collaborative Atorvastatin Diabetes Study
(CARDS) included 2838 patients with type 2 diabetes
and no documented previous history of cardiovascular
disease (CVD) with at least one of the following fea-
tures: retinopathy, albuminuria, current smoking or
hypertension. Patients had an LDL cholesterol con-

hypertension. Patients had an LDL cholesterol con-
centration of 4.14 mmol/l (160 mg/dl) or lower. As
compared to a placebo, addition of atorvastatin 10 mg
daily led to a 37% reduction in major cardiovascular
events and reduced the risk of stroke by 48% with
overall a highly statistically significant reduction in the
composite primary end point of acute coronary events,
coronary revascularization and stroke. A 27% fall in
all-cause mortality was also observed, however, this
just failed to reach statistical significance.
Patients with type 2 DM are thought to be at the
same risk of a CVD event as non-diabetic patients
with existing CVD. Lipid-lowering therapy is likely to

110
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
be as clinically effective and cost-effective in patients
with type 2 diabetes who have not yet sustained a car-
diovascular event as in non-diabetic subjects with doc-
umented CVD.
All adult patients with diabetes should have a fast-
ing lipid profile to assess their lipid status and to
search for any lipid disorder that necessitates lipid-
lowering treatment. How often this should be done is
debatable. The American Diabetes Association (ADA)
suggests screening for hyperlipidemia on an annual
basis. Lifestyle modification focusing on the reduction
of saturated fat and cholesterol intake, weight loss
(where indicated) and increased physical activity is
recommended for diabetic patients with hyperlipi-
demia and has been shown to improve the lipid pro-
file. The ADA position statement on lipid disorders is
as follows.
Individuals with diabetes who are over the age of
40 years with a total cholesterol ≥135 mg/dl

Individuals with diabetes who are over the age of
40 years with a total cholesterol ≥135 mg/dl
(3.5 mmol/l) without overt CVD should be treated
with a statin to achieve an LDL cholesterol reduction
of 30–40% regardless of baseline LDL level, and with
a primary goal of reducing LDL cholesterol to
< 100 mg/dl (2.6 mmol/l). Those individuals less than
40 years of age without overt CVD but with cardio-
vascular risk factors or long duration of diabetes
should have lipid-lowering therapy to reduce LDL
cholesterol to < 100 mg/dl (2.6 mmol/l) if this target is
not reached by lifestyle modification alone. Patients
with diabetes and overt CVD should all be treated
with a statin with an option of a lowered LDL choles-
terol target of < 70 mg/dl (1.8 mmol/l). Triglycerides
should be lowered to < 150 mg/dl (1.7 mmol/l) and
HDL cholesterol should be raised to > 40 mg/dl
(1.15 mmol/l).
In women,
an HDL target of
> 50 mg/dl should be considered.
High LDL levels should be treated with a statin

an HDL target of
> 50 mg/dl should be considered.
High LDL levels should be treated with a statin
(hydroxymethylglutaryl-coenzyme 
A 
reductase
inhibitor) examples of which include simvastatin,
atorvastatin, pravastatin and rosuvastatin. The typical
dyslipidemia of type 2 DM of raised triglycerides and
low HDL cholesterol may respond better to a fibrate,
such as fenofibrate, bezafibrate or gemfibrozil. Fibrates
bind to the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
(PPARα) ultimately leading to an interaction with
several genes critical to the control of lipid metabo-
lism. Ezetimibe is an extremely potent and specific
inhibitor of dietary and biliary cholesterol absorption.
In one study, compared to placebo, ezetimibe pro-
duced a 15% reduction in total cholesterol, a 20%
reduction in LDL cholesterol, an 8% reduction in
triglycerides and a 3% rise in HDL cholesterol.
Combination therapy such as statin/fibrate and
statin/ezetimibe may be necessary to achieve lipid tar-

statin/ezetimibe may be necessary to achieve lipid tar-
gets, although more careful monitoring is required as
such combinations are likely to be associated with
known side-effects of some lipid-lowering agents such
as myositis.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
American Diabetes Association. Management of dyslipi-
demia in adults with diabetes. Diabetes Care 1999; 22
(Suppl 1): 556–9
American Diabetes Association. Clinical Practice Recom-
mendations 2005. Diabetes Care 2005; 28 (Suppl 1): s1–s80
Colhoun HM, Betteridge DJ, Durrington PN, et al. Primary
prevention of cardiovascular disease with Atorvastatin in
Type 2 diabetes in the Collaborative Atorvastatin Diabetes
Study (CARDS): multicentre randomised placebo-controlled
trial. Lancet 2004; 36: 685–96
Durrington P. Statins and fibrates in the management of dia-
betic dyslipidemia. Diabet Med 1997; 14: 513–16
Goldberg RB, Mellies MJ, Sacks FM, et al. Cardiovascular
events and their reduction with pravastatin in diabetic and

events and their reduction with pravastatin in diabetic and
glucose-intolerant myocardial infarction survivors with aver-
age cholesterol levels. Circulation 1998; 98: 2513–19
Grover SA, Coupal L, Zowall H, et al. How cost-effective is
the treatment of dyslipidemia in patients with diabetes but
without cardiovascular disease? Diabetes Care 2001; 24:
45–50
Haffner SM, Alexander CM, Cook TJ, et al. Reduced coro-
nary events in simvastatin-treated patients with coronary
heart disease and diabetes or impaired fasting glucose levels:
sub-group analyses in the Scandinavian Simvastatin Survival
Study. Arch Intern Med 1999; 159: 2661–7
Rubins HB, Robins SJ, Collins D, et al. Gemfibrozil for the
secondary prevention of coronary heart disease in men with
low levels of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol. Veterans
Affairs High-Density Lipoprotein Cholesterol Intervention
Trial Study Group. N Engl J Med 1999; 341: 410–18
Steiner G. Lipid intervention trials in diabetes. Diabetes

Steiner G. Lipid intervention trials in diabetes. Diabetes
Care 2000; 23 (Suppl 2): B49–53

111
9
Diabetes and pregnancy
Pregnancy in women with diabetes poses a challenge
with potential adverse consequences for both mother
and fetus. There is also evidence that children born to
a diabetic mother are at increased risk of future obesi-
ty and diabetes. As maternal diabetes is hazardous for
the fetus with an increased risk of major congenital
malformations and metabolic and developmental
problems, diabetic patients should be closely super-
vised during pregnancy and preferably attend a com-
bined diabetic/obstetric clinic. Women with type 1
diabetes who are of reproductive age should be asked
about future plans for conception and advised to
attempt to normalize their HbA1c levels prior to con-
ception to avoid the risk of congenital malformations
(most commonly sacral agenesis).
There is now little excess mortality among diabet-
ic mothers. Perinatal mortality among diabetic preg-
nancies approaches that for non-diabetic pregnancy,

nancies approaches that for non-diabetic pregnancy,
but still remains above that for the general population
largely because of stillbirth, congenital malformation
and the respiratory distress syndrome that affects
infants born prematurely. Other neonatal problems
include jaundice, hypoglycemia and polycythemia.
Fetal macrosomia leads to problems with delivery
(dystocia).
Uncontrolled diabetes may cause fetal loss as a
result of early spontaneous miscarriage. The congenital
malformation rate of 4–10% remains three to five
times greater than that in the general population with
malformations involving the heart and central nervous
system being potentially lethal. Diabetic malforma-
tions are likely to be caused by both genetic and envi-
ronmental factors with glucose being the most likely
major teratogen through an unidentified mechanism.
The increase in congenital abnormalities is related to
the HbA1c level in early pregnancy hence the impor-
tance of pre-pregnancy counseling.

the HbA1c level in early pregnancy hence the impor-
tance of pre-pregnancy counseling.
Maternal hyperglycemia in diabetic pregnancy is
thought to be the major stimulus for the consequent
fetal hyperinsulinemia and resultant abnormal fetal
growth. The frequency of large-for-gestational-age
infants in diabetes is approximately twice as high as in
non-diabetic pregnancies. Such infants are at increased
risk of emergency cesarean section, birth trauma and
birth asphyxia. There is also an unexplained excess of
late stillbirths in diabetic pregnancies. The combined
diabetic/obstetric clinic should be staffed by a dia-
betologist with an interest in obstetrics, an obstetrician
with an interest in diabetes, a diabetes specialist nurse,
a midwife and a dietician.The mother with type 1 dia-
betes will need to attend at frequent intervals, usually
every 1–2 weeks. An early ultrasound scan is recom-
mended to identify gestational age and search for gross

mended to identify gestational age and search for gross
congenital abnormalities. Type 1 diabetic patients who
are pregnant need to monitor their blood glucose lev-
els intensively. Frequent adjustments of insulin doses
based on the results are undertaken usually on the rec-
ommendation of the diabetologist. There is a physio-
logic decrease in insulin sensitivity between the second
and third trimesters of pregnancy, so insulin dose
requirements usually increase gradually throughout
the second trimester. Appetite is also less affected by
the nausea of early pregnancy, so food intake rises.
Existing retinopathy may worsen during pregnancy or
new retinopathy appear, hence detailed retinal screen-
ing is mandatory during the pregnancy. Pregnant

112
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
mothers with diabetic nephropathy are a high-risk
group. Pregnancy may worsen renal function, occa-
sionally irreversibly. A successful outcome of pregnan-
cy is likely when serum creatinine is less than
175 µmol/l and diastolic blood pressure is less than
90 mmHg before conception. Fewer than half the
pregnancies are successful when creatinine exceeds
250 µmol/l. Diabetic women who have had a renal or
combined renal-pancreatic transplant have had suc-
cessfully completed pregnancies.
A repeat ultrasound scan should be performed at
18–20 weeks’ gestation and regularly after 26 weeks to
assess fetal growth and liquor volume. Most specialist
centers advocate delivery at 38 weeks, although some
may allow women with uncomplicated diabetes to go
into spontaneous labor. Respiratory distress syndrome
is a major cause of neonatal morbidity and mortality in
diabetic pregnancies. It is difficult to predict its occur-

diabetic pregnancies. It is difficult to predict its occur-
rence. Pre-eclampsia is also more common in diabetic
pregnancy. The mother’s diabetes is best managed by
continuous intravenous insulin infusion during labor
or cesarean section. Following delivery, insulin require-
ments fall promptly to normal pre-pregnancy levels.
The neonates of the diabetic mother may exhibit sev-
eral abnormalities. These include macrosomia, congen-
ital malformations, hypoglycemia owing to fetal
hyperinsulinemia, polycythemia, respiratory distress
syndrome, transient hypertrophic cardiomyopathy,
hypocalcemia, hypomagnesemia and jaundice. All
require skilled assessment and management by the
neonatal team.
An increasing number of pregnant patients with
type 2 diabetes are being encountered. Many are undi-
agnosed during the critical stages of organogenesis and
have the same high risk of congenital abnormalities as
patients with poorly controlled type 1 diabetes. Preg-

patients with poorly controlled type 1 diabetes. Preg-
nancies of women with type 2 diabetes may be at even
more risk than those with type 1 diabetes owing to
poor glycemic control in early pregnancy, obesity,
greater age and increased parity.
Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) is glucose
intolerance first recognized during pregnancy. Occa-
sionally type 1 or type 2 diabetes presents in pregnan-
cy. There is a lack of agreed diagnostic criteria for
GDM, but this should not detract from the detrimen-
tal impact of maternal hyperglycemia on the pregnan-
cy and the future health of the mother and child. The
American Diabetes Association recommends immedi-
ate glucose testing for those women deemed to be at
high risk of GDM (marked obesity, previous history of
GDM, glycosuria or strong family history of diabetes).
A fasting plasma glucose ≥126 mg/dl (7 mmol/l) or a
random plasma glucose ≥200 mg/dl (11 mmol/l)
meets the threshold for diagnosis of GDM and should

random plasma glucose ≥200 mg/dl (11 mmol/l)
meets the threshold for diagnosis of GDM and should
be confirmed on a subsequent day. High-risk women
not found to have GDM at initial screening and aver-
age-risk women should be screened between 24 and
26 weeks of gestation by either a one-step approach
using a 100 g oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) or a
two-step approach. The two-step approach involves
measuring the plasma glucose 1 h after a 50 g oral glu-
cose load and performing a 100 g OGTT test on those
women who exceed the glucose threshold 1h after the
50 g oral glucose load. A glucose threshold value of
≥140 mg/dl (7.8 mg/dl) identifies around 80% of
women with GDM. Diagnostic criteria for the 100 g
OGTT are as follows: ≥95 mg/dl (5.3 mmol/l) fasting,
≥180 mg/dl 
(10 mmol/l) 
at 
1 h,
≥155 mg/dl
(8.6 mmol/l) at 2 h and ≥140 mg/dl (7.8 mmol/l) at
3 h. Two or more of the plasma glucose values must be
met or exceeded to make the diagnosis of GDM. In

met or exceeded to make the diagnosis of GDM. In
many other countries, such testing methods are not
used and there is a reliance on the 75 g OGTT as rec-
ommended by the WHO. GDM is associated with
high parity, obesity, increased maternal age and mem-
bership of ethnic groups with a high background inci-
dence of type 2 diabetes. GDM most commonly
occurs after the middle of the second trimester and
can be detected by appropriate screening tests, espe-
cially in those at high risk. Perinatal morbidity in
GDM increases with increasing maternal hyper-
glycemia. Much of the pregnancy-related morbidity of
GDM is associated with delivering a large-for-
gestational-age infant. Women with GDM consistent-
ly have increased Cesarian section rates, although this
may be reduced by intensive management of maternal
hyperglycemia. Sequential ultrasound estimations of
fetal growth and abdominal circumference help to
identify features of inappropriate fetal growth and

identify features of inappropriate fetal growth and
inform decisions about the need for intensive blood
glucose control. The majority of mothers with GDM
can be managed by diet alone. Input from a dietician is
mandatory. Care recommendations from Diabetes UK
state that blood glucose monitoring should be per-
formed and if pre-prandial levels exceed 6.0 mmol/l
(108 mg/dl) insulin treatment should be considered.
Insulin dose should be adjusted to achieve pre-
prandial levels of 4.0–6.0 mmol/l (72–108 mg/dl).

113
DIABETES AND PREGNANCY
Many studies have indicated the advantage of control-
ling post-prandial plasma glucose levels to achieve a
good outcome. The American Diabetes Association
recommends that insulin therapy should be considered
if, on two or more occasions within a 1–2 week inter-
val, dietary management does not maintain fasting
plasma glucose below 5.8 mmol/l (105 mg/dl) and/or
the 2-hour post-prandial glucose below 6.7 mmol/l
(120 mg/dl).
There has long been controversy over the impor-
tance of treating GDM. A large NIH-funded multina-
tional study (the Hyperglycemia and Adverse Preg-
nancy Outcome Study, HAPO) which aims to define
the glycemic thresholds during a 75 g OGTT that are
associated with an adverse pregnancy outcome should
help resolve this dilemma. Recently, a large Australian
study examined whether treatment of women with
gestational diabetes reduced the risk of perinatal com-
plications. The rate of serious perinatal complications

plications. The rate of serious perinatal complications
was found to be significantly lower among the infants
of the women in the actively treated group with the
conclusion that treatment of GDM did indeed reduce
serious perinatal morbidity and may also improve the
woman’s health-related quality of life. On the basis of
this research, this view was supported by an editorial
in the New England Journal of Medicine, although
undoubtedly several issues remain, not least of which
is the blood glucose level that should trigger active
intervention.
The importance of GDM to the mother is that it
identifies her as having a metabolic susceptibility for
the subsequent development of type 2 diabetes. There
is a variable rate of progression to diabetes, with up to
50% of women from ethnic minority groups progress-
ing to diabetes within 5 years of a GDM pregnancy,
although this is lower in Caucasian women. There is
also an increased risk of cardiovascular disease and

also an increased risk of cardiovascular disease and
such women need to be advised about the benefit
of weight loss, exercise and smoking cessation. All
women with GDM should have an OGTT 6 weeks
after delivery and the results interpreted according to
WHO or ADA criteria.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
American Diabetes Association. Gestational diabetes. Dia-
betes Care 2000; 23 (Suppl 1): S77–9
Crowther CA, Hiller JE, Moss JR, et al. Effect of treatment
of gestational diabetes mellitus on pregnancy outcomes. N
Engl J Med 2005; 352: 2477–86
Drury IM, Greene AT, Stronge JM. Pregnancy complicated
by clinical diabetes mellitus. A study of 600 pregnancies.
Obstet Gynecol 1977; 49: 519–22
Greene MF, Solomon CG. Gestational diabetes mellitus –
time to treat. N Engl J Med 2005; 352: 2544–6
HAPO Study Cooperative Research Group. The Hyper-
glycemia and Adverse Pregnancy Outcome (HAPO) Study.
Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2002; 78: 69–77
Lowy C. Beard RW, Goldschmidt J. The UK diabetic preg-

Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2002; 78: 69–77
Lowy C. Beard RW, Goldschmidt J. The UK diabetic preg-
nancy survey. Acta Endocrinol 1986; 277 (Suppl): 86–9
Metzger BE, Coustan DR. Summary and recommendations
of the Fourth International Workshop-Conference on Gesta-
tional Diabetes Mellitus. Diabetes Care 1998; 21 (Suppl 2):
B161–7
Pendersen J. The Pregnant Diabetic and her Newborn.
Copenhagen: Munksgaard, 1977
Solomon CG, Willett WC, Rich-Edwards J, et al. Variability
in diagnostic evaluation and criteria for gestational diabetes.
Diabetes Care 1996; 19: 12–16
Sutherland HW, Stowers JM, eds. Carbohydrate Metabolism
in Pregnancy and the Newborn. Edinburgh: Churchill Liv-
ingstone, 1984
Williams CB, Iqbal S, Zawacki CM, et al. Effect of selective
screening for gestational diabetes. Diabetes Care 1999; 22:
418–21

115
10
Living with diabetes
Diabetes mellitus, like any chronic medical condition,
impacts on quality of life. In one study, at the time of
diagnosis of type 1 diabetes, 36% of children exhibited
significant psychologic distress. Remarkably, however,
in 93% this had completely abated 9 months after
diagnosis. Not surprisingly, the parents of newly diag-
nosed children also experience psychologic upset of a
temporary nature, more prominent in mothers.
Although not established, adults with new-onset type
1 diabetes probably have similar temporary psycho-
logic responses; however, there is apparently little
psychologic morbidity in adults associated with the
diagnosis of type 2 diabetes.
Depression is twice as common in adults with type
1 and type 2 diabetes than in a control population and,
interestingly, depression commonly precedes the diag-
nosis in type 2 patients. The course of depression in
diabetes may be particularly chronic and severe.

diabetes may be particularly chronic and severe.
The diagnosis of diabetes has effects on other
aspects of the diabetic patient’s life. In most developed
countries, drivers with diabetes have a statutory
requirement to declare their diabetes to the national
licensing authority. Furthermore, failure to do so may
invalidate motor insurance policies. Following declara-
tion of the diagnosis of diabetes, a driving license is
issued for a maximum of 3 years in the UK, but is
renewable at no cost following completion of a med-
ical questionnaire. If a patient reports a medical prob-
lem that may affect safe driving then the licensing
authority will solicit more detailed medical reports.
Most countries impose limitations on the issue of
vocational licenses (heavy goods vehicles, passenger
carrying vehicles) to insulin-treated diabetic drivers.
Diabetic individuals treated with insulin or sulfonyl-
ureas are not permitted to fly commercial aircraft or to
work as air-traffic controllers.

ureas are not permitted to fly commercial aircraft or to
work as air-traffic controllers.
Diabetic patients may experience difficulties with
employment. Statutory or company policy may disbar
them from certain occupations and these include train
drivers, the armed forces, off-shore oil-rig work, etc.
Furthermore, even when there is no risk due to possi-
ble hypoglycemia, discrimination by employers may
affect hiring practices leading to loss of self-esteem
and earning ability, and impacting on the patient’s
ability to support a family and their future quality of
life.
Insurance may also prove to pose problems for
individuals with diabetes. Insurance companies may
refuse to accept diabetic applicants for life insurance
or impose restrictions or inflated premiums. More
favorable insurance terms may be provided by
approved brokers recommended by national diabetes
associations.
There are many other areas in life where having
diabetes may cause difficulties and they include travel

diabetes may cause difficulties and they include travel
overseas, insurance and medical care abroad, exposure
to unusual foods and drinks in different countries and
the effect of intercurrent illness and sport on day-to-
day blood glucose control.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Kovacs M, Goldston D, Obrosky DS, Bonar LK. Psychiatric
disorders in youths with IDDM: rates and risk factors. Dia-
betes Care 1997; 20: 36–44

117
11
Future developments in diabetes
Research activity in the field of diabetes has increased
greatly in recent years. People with diabetes would
want this to translate into more effective treatment of
diabetes and its complications. Patients with type 1
diabetes would like to be freed from the need to self-
inject with insulin. Pancreatic and islet-cell transplan-
tation can achieve this; however, it is unlikely that
these techniques will find widespread application in
the immediate future. It may prove possible to gener-
ate mature β-cells from embryonic stem cells, but
many issues need to be resolved before cells derived by
these methods can be used in human transplantation.
Although experimental gene therapy (with transfer of
DNA to somatic cells) has shown promising results, no
proposed gene therapy model for the treatment or
prevention of diabetes has reached the stage of clinical
testing. Technological developments to produce

testing. Technological developments to produce
implantable insulin pumps with continuous glucose
sensing continue, but are not sufficiently advanced to
allow wide uptake. Until sufficient progress in these
areas has been achieved, it is likely that most progress
will be made through the development of new phar-
maceutical products to treat the hyperglycemia of dia-
betes. Such activity is burgeoning. New insulin analogs
continue to appear. Several devices allowing the pul-
monary delivery of inhaled insulin have already been
developed. Inhaled insulin treatment is being actively
investigated as an alternative non-invasive method of
insulin delivery and many studies have already attest-
ed to its effectiveness in achieving tight glycemic con-
trol in both type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Oral insulins
have also been developed but are only at a preliminary
level of investigation. Perhaps the most exciting
potential therapy area lies in the discovery and evalu-

potential therapy area lies in the discovery and evalu-
ation of new drugs to treat type 2 diabetes. Insulin
secretion can be stimulated by the incretin gut hor-
mones glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) and glucose-
dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) without
leading to hypoglycemia. Stable analogs of these
incretins have been developed with a longer half-life.
Such an analog, exenatide, Byetta® Amylin pharma-
ceuticals (exendin-4), when injected subcutaneously
has been shown to reduce HbA1c in patients with
type 2 diabetes failing to achieve glycemic control on
maximal doses of either metformin alone or
metformin/sulfonylurea combination. Inhibitors of
dipeptidyl peptidase-IV (DPP-IV) which degrades
GLP-1 have also been developed and have reached an
advanced stage of clinical trial. Amylin, a polypeptide
synthesized by the islet β-cells and co-secreted with
insulin, appears to act centrally to induce satiety, slow
gastric emptying and suppress pancreatic glucagon

gastric emptying and suppress pancreatic glucagon
secretion. Pramlintide is a soluble analog of amylin
with amylin-like effects which last for about 3 hours
after subcutaneous administration prior to a meal. It
has been launched in the USA as Symlin®, Amylin
pharmaceuticals and is licensed in both type 1 and 2
diabetes as an adjunct to meal-time insulin therapy in
those who have failed to achieve desired glucose con-
trol despite optimal insulin therapy. One of its main
advantages is that it is not associated with weight gain.
Other exciting drugs in development are dual peroxi-
some proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)α and γ
agonists, which may treat both hyperglycemia and
dyslipidemia, and rimonabant which acts on the
endocannabinoid system. Endocannabinoids act on

118
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
cannabinoid type 1 (CB1) and type 2 (CB2) receptors.
The endocannabinoid system plays a key role in the
regulation of energy balance and fat accumulation and
overactivity of the system is associated with increased
food intake and fat accumulation. Rimonabant acts as a
selective CB1 blocker inducing weight loss, reducing
triglyceride levels and improving glucose tolerance. It
presents a novel tool to reduce cardiovascular risk fac-
tors of the metabolic syndrome including dyslipidemia
and type 2 diabetes (as well as nicotine dependence).
Rimonabant (Acomplia®, Sanofi-Aventis), has already
obtained regulatory approval as an adjunct to diet and
exercise for the treatment of obese patients or over-
weight patients with associated risk factors.
Thus, many potentially useful pharmacologic
agents are currently being investigated with some at a
late stage of clinical trial. The hope is that such
advances will feed through to real clinical benefit for

advances will feed through to real clinical benefit for
patients with diabetes.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Day C. Amylin analogue as an antidiabetic agent. Br J Dia-
betes Vasc Dis 2005; 5: 151–4
DeFronzo RA, Ratner RE, Han J, et al. Effects of exenatide
(exendin-4) on glycemic control and weight over 30 weeks
in metformin-treated patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes
Care 2005; 28: 1092–100
Finer N, Pagotto U. The endocannabinoid system: a new
therapeutic target for cardiovascular risk factor manage-
ment. Br J Diabetes Vasc Dis 2005; 5: 121–4
Green BD, Irwin N, Gault VA, et al. Development and ther-
apeutic potential of incretin hormone analogues for type 2
diabetes. Br J Diabetes Vasc Dis 2005; 5: 134–40

119
FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS IN DIABETES
Figure 153
Intact islet cells ready for islet cell transplanta-
tion. The islets are isolated from donated human pancreas,
suspended during partial digestion and centrifuged in a
cooled centrifuge. The retrieval of good quality islets from
donor pancreases is critical to the success of islet cell trans-
plantation
Figure 154
Portal venogram showing the hepatic portal vein prior to administration of isolated human islets. In the Edmon-
ton protocol, an adequate mass of freshly isolated islets are embolized for transplantation into the liver through a small catheter
placed into the main portal vein. Novel immunosuppressive regimens, as outlined in the text, have led to an increased success
rate of this experimental mode of therapy of diabetes

120
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
Figure 155
Several pharmaceutical companies have devel-
oped inhaled short-acting insulin preparations using differ-
ent technology and inhalation devices. One such product,
Exubera® (Pfizer) has recently been granted marketing
authorization by the European Commission and will shortly
be available on prescription. Clinical studies have attested to
an efficiency of inhaled insulin to control daytime blood glu-
cose levels comparable to that of soluble insulin. Regulatory
agencies have expressed concern about long-term pul-
monary safety

121
Index
acanthosis nigricans  77, 104
acromegaly  2, 18
acute complications of DM  63–7
Addison’s disease  18
adenovirus  12
adhesive capsulitis, shoulder  78
alcohol  33, 63
alprostadil (prostaglandin E1)  76, 90, 91
American Diabetes Association (ADA)
diagnostic criteria  1–2, 14
etiologic classification  6
exercise guidelines  34
GDM criteria  112, 113
HbA1c target  38
hyperlipidemia screening recommendations  110
Working Group on the Prevention of Diabetes
recommendations  14
amputation, lower-limb  73, 74
amylin  11, 117
angiotensin II receptor antagonist  73
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor  70,
73–4
apomorphine  76
arthropathy
Charcot’s  74, 93, 94
cheiroarthropathy  77–8, 106
atheromatous lesions  73
atorvastatin  109, 110
B lymphocytes  10
bacterial infection, skin  105
Bacteroides spp. 74
balanitis  104
Banting, Frederick  4
becaplermin  95
bendrofluazide  74
Best, Charles H. 4
beta-blockers  74
bezafibrate  110
blood glucose  36–7

bendrofluazide  74
Best, Charles H. 4
beta-blockers  74
bezafibrate  110
blood glucose  36–7
monitoring systems  37, 56, 117
plasma profile
‘glucose excursions’  55
insulin injections  49, 50
non-diabetic  49
stable control  55
self-monitoring technique  53
subcutaneously implanted continuous monitoring
system  37, 56, 117
bovine serum albumin  10
‘brittle’ diabetics  38
bullae  77, 103
calcium-channel blockers  74
calorie restriction  34
candidiasis  104
carbohydrates, dietary management of type 1 DM  33
cardiovascular disease  73
recurrent coronary heart disease (CHD) events  73
carpal tunnel syndrome  72
β-cells, pancreatic
autoimmune destruction  10
dysfunction  10–12
monogenetic defects  2, 9
stem cell generated  117
viral infection  9–10
Charcot’s arthropathy  74, 93, 94
cheiroarthropathy  77–8, 106
children and adolescents
childhood obesity  21

122
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
childhood type 2 diabetes  2
continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion (CSII)  60
emotional problems  59
hypoglycemia  59
insulin requirements  59–60
macrosomic babies  108, 111
puberty  60
treatment  59–60
cholesterol  33, 109
Cholesterol and Recurrent Events Trial (CARE)  109
chronic complications of DM  69–108
cirrhosis  76–7
classification of DM  2–3, 6
Collaborative Atorvastatin Diabetes Study (CARDS)
109
coma, hyperosmolar non-ketoacidotic  67
continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD)  71
continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion (CSII)  60
Coxsackie B virus  10, 12
creatinine level  70–1, 112
Cushing’s syndrome  2, 17
cystic fibrosis  2, 28
cytomegalovirus  10, 12
Da Qing study, China  14
depression  115
dermopathy  77, 102
Diabetes Control and Complications Trial (DCCT),
USA  35, 37, 63, 69
diabetes mellitus (DM), definition  1
Diabetes Prevention Program, USA  14
diabetes specialist nurses (DSNs)  37, 61

Diabetes Prevention Program, USA  14
diabetes specialist nurses (DSNs)  37, 61
Diabetes UK, GDM recommendations  112
‘diabetic foods’  33
diagnostic criteria of DM  1–2, 7
dialysis  71
diazoxide  2
dietary advice  56, 57
DIGAMI study  73
dipeptidyl peptidase-IV (DPP-IV) inhibitor  117
Dose Adjustment for Normal Eating (DAFNE) program
37–8
Down’s syndrome  2, 12
doxazosin  74
driving licence, UK  115
drug treatment
dose range, distribution and half-life  58
type 2 diabetes  39–40
Dupuytren’s contracture  78, 107
dyslipidemia  109–10
endocannabinoid system  117–18
entrapment syndrome  72, 87
environmental factors
for children and adolescents  59–60
viral infection  9, 10, 12, 30
Epstein–Barr virus  10
erectile dysfunction (ED)
causes  75
hypogonadism  76
treatment  76, 89
vacuum pump system  76, 88
vasoactive drug
injection  76, 90
transurethral application  76, 90
eruptive xanthomata  77, 105, 106
Escherichia coli 44
European Diabetes Project Group, HbA1c target  38

Escherichia coli 44
European Diabetes Project Group, HbA1c target  38
European Nicotinamide Diabetes Intervention Trial
(ENDIT)  13
exenatide  117
exercise  34
and insulin sensitivity  34
eye disorders
DIDMOAD syndrome  80
laser photocoagulation  84
maculopathy  82
normal fundus  80
ophthalmology referral  85
retinal detachment  82
retinopathy  69–70, 80–5
thromboneovascular glaucoma  84
triamcinolone therapy  82
vitreous hemorrhage  85
ezetimibe  110
fasting plasma glucose (FGP) concentration  1
fat intake  33, 34
fenofibrate  110
fibrates  110
fiber, dietary  33
fibrocalculous pancreatopathy  2
Finnish Diabetes Prevention Study  14, 71
foot disorders
burn injuries  88
callus  74
Charcot’s arthropathy  74, 93, 94
deep infection  74, 93
digital arterial calcification  75, 97, 98
gangrene  96, 97
osteomyelitis  74, 75, 94

123
INDEX
treatment  75, 95
ulcer  74, 92, 95
weight-bearing reduction  95
future developments
β-cells, stem cell generated  117
continuous glucose monitoring  117
inhaled insulin delivery  117, 119
insulin pumps  117
islet cell transplantation  117
oral insulin delivery  117
pancreatic transplantation  117
pharmaceutical products  117–18
gastric neurostimulator (GES) system  88
gemfibrozil  77, 109, 110
genes
DBQ1 9
glucokinase  12
INS (insulin gene)  9
genetic loci
7p (glucokinase)  12
11p5.5 (IDDM2)  9
geographic variation of DM  1, 3
gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM)  2, 14, 112
ADA recommendations  112, 113
Cesarian section rates  112
Diabetes UK recommendations  112
HAPO study  113
O’Sullivan–Mahan criteria (USA)  2
WHO criteria  2, 112, 113
see also pregnancy
glitazones  14, 39–40, 41, 77
glomerulopathy  91
glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1)  11, 117
glucocorticoids  2
glucose
metabolism, brain  66
tolerance, impaired  2, 3, 11, 14
see also blood glucose

glucose
metabolism, brain  66
tolerance, impaired  2, 3, 11, 14
see also blood glucose
glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP)
11, 117
α-glucosidase inhibitors  39
glucotoxicity  11
glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) antibodies  10
gluten  10
glycemic control  38, 70
granuloma annulare  102
health-care costs  1
Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation Study (HOPE
study)  74
hemochromatosis  2, 19, 29
hemoglobin (HbA1c)  34
in pregnancy  111
targets  38
hepatic nuclear factors (HFNs)  2, 11–12
hepatic portal vein, isolated islet administration  119
high-density lipoprotein (HDL)  109
human leukocyte antigen (HLA)  9
HLA antigens  9
hydroxymethylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase inhibitor
109–10
hyperbaric oxygen  75
hyperglycemia  11
in pregnancy  111
sugars  33
in surgery  61
symptoms  1
Hyperglycemic Adverse Pregnancy Outcome (HAPO)
study  113
hyperinsulinemia  11, 77
hyperlipidemia  71, 109–10
hyperosmolar non-ketoacidotic coma  67
hypertension  70–1, 73–4

hyperlipidemia  71, 109–10
hyperosmolar non-ketoacidotic coma  67
hypertension  70–1, 73–4
hypertriglyceridemia  109
hypoglycemia  33–7, 63, 65
brain glucose metabolism  66
children and adolescents  59
hypoglycemia-induced cardiac dysrhythmia  63
neonatal  111
in surgery  61
symptoms  63
hypoinsulinemia  34
fetal  111
IDDM1  9
IDDM2  9
impaired fasting glucose (IFG)  2
impaired glucose tolerance (IGT)  2, 3, 11, 14
indapamide  74
insulin
absorption rate, factors affecting  50
administration sites  48
biosynthesis  44
biphasic response to glucose  22
crystals  43
deficiency, biochemical consequences  23
discovery of  4
impaired secretion  10
infuser  51, 117
inhalation delivery system  117, 119
injection technique  49
lipid hypertrophy  52, 53
lipoatrophy  52
longer-acting  35, 40
oral delivery  117

124
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
pens  35, 46–7
plasma profile, non-diabetic  49
proinsulin, protein sequence  43
rapid-acting  35
requirements, children and adolescents  59–60
resistance  2, 10–12
syringes  46
insulin analogs and formulations  45
insulin aspart  35, 60
insulin detemir  35–6, 40
insulin glargine  35–6, 40
insulin glulisine  35
insulin lispro  35, 60
NPH (isophane)  35, 40
porcine insulin  36
protamine retarded  60
insulin autoantibodies (IAA)  10
insulin promoter factor-1  11
insulin regimes
basal-bolus  35–6
continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion (CSII)  36,
60
twice-daily  35
insulin resistance syndrome  2, 10–12
definition  12
insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM)  see type 1
diabetes
insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-1  77
insulinoma  25
insulitis  10
insurance issues  115
interferon (IFN)γ 10
interleukin (IL)-2  10
islet of Langerhans
Coxsackie B viral infection (LM)  30
cystic fibrosis, pancreas (LM)  28
glucagon immunostained (LM)  24

cystic fibrosis, pancreas (LM)  28
glucagon immunostained (LM)  24
hemochromatosis, hemosiderin deposits (LM)  29
insulin immunostained (LM)  24
insulin storage granules (EM)  25
insulitis hyperexpression (LM)  28
normal pancreas (EM)  25
normal pancreas (LM)  24
somatostatin immunostained  25
type 1 DM
β-cells (LM)  26
β-cell loss (LM)  27
infiltrate (LM)  26
lymphocyte infiltration (LM)  27
type 2 DM
amyloid deposition (LM)  29
islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP)  11
islet cell antibodies (ICA)  10, 28
islet cell transplantation  41, 117, 119
jaundice, neonatal  111
ketoacidosis  64
biomechanical features  66
causes of death  67
ketosis, in surgery  61
Klinefelter’s syndrome  2, 12, 19
laser photocoagulation  70, 84
latent autoimmune diabetes in adults (LADA)  2
late-onset diabetes mellitus  2
immune-mediated type 1  2
lifestyle change  14
lipid hypertrophy  52, 53
liver
cirrhosis  76–7
glucose output  11
glucose production  22
hepatic nuclear factors (HFNs)  2, 11–12

cirrhosis  76–7
glucose output  11
glucose production  22
hepatic nuclear factors (HFNs)  2, 11–12
hepatic portal vein, isolated islet administration  119
low-density lipoprotein (LDL)  109–10
macrophages  10
macrosomic babies  108, 111
maculopathy  69–70
maggot debridement, ulcer  75
major histocompatibility complex (MHC)  9
antigens  10
male excess, type 1  1
malignant otitis externa  105
maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY)  2,
11–12
symptoms  12
meglitinides  39
metabolic syndrome  see insulin resistance syndrome
metformin  39, 41, 77
migratory necrolytic erythema  77, 103
monitoring systems, blood glucose  37, 56, 117
mumps  10, 12
myotonic dystrophy  20
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney
Diseases (NIDDK), USA trials  13
necrobiosis lipoidica diabeticorum  77, 101
nephropathy  70–1
neurogenic differentiation factor (NEUROD) 1  11
neuropathy
acute  72
autonomic  72–3, 87
chronic insidious sensory  72
classification  86

125
INDEX
mononeuropathy  72
pathogenesis  71–2
prevalence  71
proximal motor  72
third cranial nerve palsy  87
treatment  73
ulnar  87
nitrosamines  10
non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH)  76–7
non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM)  see
type 2 diabetes
obesity
body mass index (BMI)  12, 16
childhood  21
energy expenditure  13
epidemic  12
food consumption  12
sequelae  13
oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT)  1–2, 112
orlistat  34, 40
osteomyelitis  74, 75, 94, 99
foot  74, 75, 94
spinal  99
osteoporosis  94, 99
pancreas
calcification  31
cancer  2
cancer (CT scan)  31
hemochromatosis  29
pancreatic duct, normal  30
transplantation  41–2, 117
trauma  2
see also β-cell; islet of Langerhans
pancreatectomy  2
pancreatitis  2
patient education  37–8
peripheral vascular disease  73, 74, 97, 98
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPAR)
agonists  40, 110, 117
pheochromocytoma  2
phosphodiesterase inhibitors  76
plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 (PAI-1)  73

phosphodiesterase inhibitors  76
plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 (PAI-1)  73
platelet-derived growth factor  75
polycythemia, neonatal  111
Prader–Willi syndrome  16
pramlintide  117
prandial glucose regulators  39
pravastatin  110
pregnancy  2, 111–13
Caesarean section rates  111–12
haemoglobin (HbA1c)  111
insulin regimes  111–12
neonatal problems  112
perinatal problems  111
pre-eclampsia  112
ultrasound scans  112
see also gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM)
prevention trials, pharmacological
ACT NOW (pioglitazone)  14
DREAM (ramipril and rosiglitazone)  14
NAVIGATOR (nateglinide and valsartan)  14
ORIGIN (insulin glargine)  14
proteinuria  70
puberty  60
pulmonary delivery, inhaled insulin delivery  117
quality of life issues  115
Rabson–Mendenhall syndrome  21
random plasma glucose concentration  1
Reaven’s syndrome  see insulin resistance syndrome
α-receptor blockers  74
relative insulin deficiency  2
renal
artery stenosis  73
failure  71, 92
glomerulopathy  91

relative insulin deficiency  2
renal
artery stenosis  73
failure  71, 92
glomerulopathy  91
transplantation  71
retinopathy  69–70, 80–5
background  80
end-stage  84
exudative  82
peripheral proliferative  83
serious  81
severe  81
rimonabant  118
rosuvastatin  110
rubella, congenital  12
Scandinavian Simvastatin Survival Study (4S Trial)  109
sibutramine  40
sildenafil  76, 89
simvastatin  109, 110
skin disorders  77, 100
acanthosis nigricans  77, 104
balanitis  104
bullae  77, 103
candidiasis  104
dermopathy  77, 102
eruptive xanthomata  77, 105, 106
granuloma annulare  102
migratory necrolytic erythema  77, 103
necrobiosis lipoidica diabeticorum  77, 101
severe bacterial infection  105

126
ATLAS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
uncommon  77
vitiligo  77, 100
skin graft
bi-layered bioengineered skin substitute  75
cultured human dermis  75
smoking  34
sodium restriction  33
Staphylococcus aureus 74
statin therapy  109–10
lipid-lowering combination therapy
statin/ezetimibe  109–10
statin/fibrate  109–10
steatohepatitis  76–7
Streptococcus pyogenes 74
Study to Prevent Non-Insulin Dependent Diabetes
(STOP-NIDDM) Trial, multinational  14
subcutaneously implanted continuous monitoring
system, blood glucose  37, 56, 117
sulfonylureas  39, 41, 63
surgery  61–2
insulin regimens  62
perioperative complications  61
postoperative infection  61
syndrome X  see insulin resistance syndrome
T lymphocytes  9–10
tachycardia  73
tadalafil  76
thiazide  2
thiazolidinediones  14, 39–40
transplantation
islet cell  41, 117, 119
renal  71
simultaneous pancreas-kidney transplants (SPKs)
41–2
whole-pancreas  41, 117
triglycerides  109–10
truncal radiculopathy  72
tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α 10

triglycerides  109–10
truncal radiculopathy  72
tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α 10
Turner’s syndrome  2, 12, 20
type 1 diabetes
classification  2–3
dietary advice  57
epidemiology  3
ethnic variation  9
incidence  1
male excess  1, 3
pathogenesis  9–10
pre-insulin treatment  4
prevention  13
surgery  61
treatment
dietary  33
insulin  35–6
viral associations  30
type 2 diabetes
childhood  2
classification  2–3
dietary advice  57
dietary treatment  34
epidemiology  3
incidence  1
pathogenesis  10–11
prevention  13–14
surgery  62
treatment
drugs  39–40
HbA1c targets  38
insulin  40
United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS)
38, 69
Blood Pressure Control Study  74
HbA1c target  38
ursodeoxycholic acid  77
vardenafil  76
very-low-density lipoprotein (VLDL)  109
Veterans Affairs HDL Intervention Trial (VA-HIT)  109
viral associations
adenovirus  12
β-cells, viral infection  9–10
Coxsackie B virus  10, 12
cytomegalovirus  10, 12
Epstein–Barr virus  10
type 1 diabetes  30

Coxsackie B virus  10, 12
cytomegalovirus  10, 12
Epstein–Barr virus  10
type 1 diabetes  30
vitiligo  77, 100
weight loss  14, 34
Wolfram’s syndrome  12
World Health Organization (WHO)
diagnostic criteria  1
GDM criteria  112, 113

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
MANAGING DIABETES
MELLITUS
Guide for Health Workers
ROYAL GOVERNMENT OF BHUTAN
MINISTRY OF HEALTH
DEPARTMENT OF MEDICAL SERVICE
August 2007

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
Acknowledgement
 The Ministry of Health would like to acknowledge and thank the
author and review committee members involved in preparing the
guideline.
Author:
Dr. Bhakta Raj Giri MD.
Senior Medical Specialist
Dr. Karma Tobgyel MD.
Maxillofacial Surgeon
Maj. (Dr.) Hari Chhetri MD. Paediatrician
Review Committee Members:
Dr. Ballab Sharma MD. Senior Medical Specialist
Dr. Tobgay Wangchuck MD. Medical Superintendent
Dr.Tandin Dorji MD, MPH. Paediatrician
Maj (Dr.) D.B. Subba MD. Senior Medical Specialist
Lt.Col. (Dr) T.B. Rai MD. Senior Medical Specialist
Mr. Rup Narayan Chapagai, Chief Programme Officer, DMS
Mr.Yeshi Wangdi ,Programme Officer, DMS
Mr.Chador Wangdi, Assistant Programme Officer, DMS
Dr.Ngawang Tenzin, Medical Director, JDWNRH
The Ministry of Health  would also in equal measures acknowledge
and thank WDF for financial support and BERDIEM on technical
support and advice.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
Foreword
Diabetes is a chronic, degenerative and life long disorder.   WHO
estimated a global prevalence of diabetes of 194 millions for 2003
and it is estimated that by 2025 there will be 333 million people living
with diabetes world wide.  Diabetes is more prevalent in urban settings
than in rural.  Its prevalence in cities in neighboring countries ranges
between 11% - 14% of the population.  This rapid increase is due to
increased life expectancy, sedentary life styles and changing dietary
habits.
The Royal Government’s social spending has always remained very
high throughout the planned period. Over 24% of total allocations
during the current five year plan (2002-2007) have been allocated to
health and education sectors.  This is so, because Bhutan’s unique
development philosophy of Gross national Happiness (GNH) like the
human development concept of United Nations, places well being of
its people at the center of development.

its people at the center of development.
Recognizing diabetes as a serious non communicable disease the
Ministry in collaboration with World Diabetes Foundation (WDF) since
July, 2005 is publishing guide for Health Workers on Managing
Diabetes with objectives of tackling diabetes, an emerging disease
that has inflicted the Bhutanese populations but the extent of which
yet to be ascertained.
This guide is designed to provide information on managing diabetes
mellitus and its complications for all categories of health workers. And
this will be made available at all hospitals and health centers for every
day use.
I fervently hope that the health workers use this manual at every
opportunity in    educating people on preventing diabetes to those
who are at risk of developing the disease, managing diabetes optimally
in those who already have the disease so that they can lead the best
possible life.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
I am pleased that task force members have shown great interest and
worked hard in bringing out the guide.  I would also like to acknowledge
the financial support of World Diabetes Foundation (WDF) and
technical input of Bangladesh Institute of Research and Rehabilitation
in Diabetes, Endocrine and Metabolic Disorder (BIRDEM) in preparing
this very important guide.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
Preface
Diabetes is one important and fast increasing non communicable
diseases of the developing world. The prevalence of this disorder is
yet to be ascertained but estimates have been made of 2.1 to 2.3
percent of Bhutanese population to be living with diabetes. Prevalence
of this disorder is already much higher in the neighboring countries.
Diabetes is a life long disorder. A diabetic can lead a normal life if the
condition is detected early and it is managed adequately. However,
inadequate or ‘non-management’ is fraught with several life threatening
acute and debilitating chronic complications. Costs in managing these
chronic complications are enormous.
The most rational approach to managing this disorder is by educating
the people of the risk factors of diabetes and diminishing exposure to
these risk factors through life style modifications and healthy eating

these risk factors through life style modifications and healthy eating
thereby preventing or delaying occurrence of the disorder. It is equally
important to detect the disorder early and institute proper management.
Sustained glycemic and blood pressure control prevents end organ
damage which can be achieved through a combination of
pharmacological and non-pharmacological means.
A diabetic must understand the disease and actively participate in its
management. The family members must be supportive and help the
diabetic in his/her life style and dietary modification measures. A
diabetic must follow up with his/her health worker, get periodic
assessment and receive medications that are tailored to his/her need.
It is pertinent that the health workers fully understand the disorder
and assist the diabetic in the management of the disease.
This manual ‘Managing Diabetes Mellitus, Guide for Health Workers’
aims at presenting a comprehensive knowledge on diabetes,

aims at presenting a comprehensive knowledge on diabetes,
aetiopathology, complications, both acute and chronic,
pharmacological  management, diet and physical activity, diabetes
and surgery, hypertension in diabetes, diabetes in pregnancy,
childhood and elderly, dental care in diabetes  and preventing diabetes.
The manual is intended for day to day use by Doctors, Assistant Clinical
Officers, Health Assistants and Nurses at all level of health facilities
in Bhutan. It is kept as simple, handy and readable as possible. It is
hoped that all health workers use this manual in guiding and managing
people living with diabetes.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
CONTENTS
Chapter 1
: Definition, Diagnosis and Classification of
Diabetes Mellitus........................................................1
Chapter 2
: Type 1 Diabetes.........................................................8
Chapter 3
: Type 2 Diabetes.......................................................12
Chapter 4
: Principles of Management of Diabetes Mellitus.......17
Chapter 5
: Diet in diabetes .......................................................20
Chapter 6
: Oral Hypoglycemic Agents(OHA).............................31
Chapter 7
: Insulin and Its Complications...................................39
Chapter 8
: Complications of Diabetes - Acute...........................45
Chapter 9
: Complications of Diabetes-Chronic.........................55
Chapter 10 : Elderly and Diabetes................................................71
Chapter 11 : Diabetes Mellitus and Surgery..................................75

Chapter 11 : Diabetes Mellitus and Surgery..................................75
Chapter 12 : Hypertension in Diabetes Mellitus.............................82
Chapter 13 : Gestationnel Diabetes Mellitus (GDM)....................90
Chapter 14 : Diabetes in Children................................................101
Chapter 15 : Diabetes and Mouth Care......................................109
Chapter 16 : Hospitalization in Diabetes....................................113
Chapter 17 : Preventing Diabetes, the way Forward..................116

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers


Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
1
Definition, Diagnosis and
Classification of  Diabetes Mellitus
Chapter 1

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
2
Definition, Diagnosis and Classification
of Diabetes Mellitus
Dr. B.R. Giri  MD.
Diabetes mellitus is a metabolic disorder that result in hyperglycemia due to
defects in insulin secretion, insulin action, or both.
Chronic hyperglycemia of diabetes is associated with long term damage,
dysfunction, and failure of various organ systems of body, especially the eye,
kidney, heart, blood vessel and the nerves.
Hyperglycemia is either due to lack of insulin or to an excess of factors which
oppose its action.
This imbalance leads to abnormalities of carbohydrate, protein and lipid
metabolism.
Plasma glucose cutoffs for diabetes and impaired glucose tolerance
Fasting plasma
2 hours post 75
Plasma glucose cutoff as
glucose (mg/dl)
grams glucose
risk factor for the following
load (mg/dl)
Diabetes
> 126
> 200
Eye, Kidney, Nerve and
Cardiovascular diseases
IGT
<126
140-199
Diabetes and Cardiovascular
diseases
IFG
111-126
Not Applicable

IGT
<126
140-199
Diabetes and Cardiovascular
diseases
IFG
111-126
Not Applicable
Not well studied
GDM
111-126
>140
IGT: Impaired Glucose Tolerance, IFG: Impaired Fasting Glucose, GDM:
Gestational Diabetes Mellitus
1.1. Aetiopathogenesis
Diabetes mellitus results from defects in insulin secretion, insulin action, or
both.
Several pathological processes are involved in the causation of diabetes.
1.1.1. Autoimmune Beta cell destruction of pancreas
In Type 1 diabetes there is absolute deficiency of insulin. Individuals at risk to
develop Type 1  diabetes have serological markers for autoimmune pathological
process occurring in Islets of Langerhans in the pancreas.
Table 1.1

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
3
Most obvious histological findings of pancreas that had Type 1 Diabetes for a
long time is an  almost total lack of insulin secreting beta cell, although A and D
cells are well preserved.  In recent  onset Type 1 Diabetes, most islets are insulin
deficient.  Some islets with residual beta cells show infiltration with chronic
inflammatory cells suggesting Insulinitis.
Individuals at risk of Type 1 Diabetes can often be identified by the serological
evidence of an  autoimmune process occurring in pancreatic islets of Langerhans
and by genetic markers.
1.1. 2. Abnormalities of insulin resistance
Insulin resistance is the main mechanism in Type 2 Diabetes where, insulin is
generally available in adequate amounts but however, the action of insulin is
blunted and hence, resultant hyperglycemia. It is of equal importance that
inadequate compensatory insulin secretory response occur due to pancreatic

inadequate compensatory insulin secretory response occur due to pancreatic
beta cell exhaustion. In this type of diabetes, a degree of hyperglycemia sufficient
to cause pathologic and functional changes in various target tissues, but without
clinical symptoms may be present for a long duration before diabetes is detected.
1.2.
Clinical staging of Diabetes Mellitus and other categories
of abnormal glucose tolerance
1. 2.1. Normoglycemia
Individuals with fasting plasma glucose less than 110mg/dl are termed
normoglycemic.
1.2.2. Impaired Glucose Tolerance (IGT and IFT)
These represent intermediate state between nondiabetic and diabetic states. These
indicate glucose regulation abnormalities, in the fasting and post-meal states.
Individual will not have any clinical manifestation. However, macrovascular
changes continue to occur in these stages.
1.2.3. Diabetes Mellitus
•
Insulin requiring for survival:  Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus
•

1.2.3. Diabetes Mellitus
•
Insulin requiring for survival:  Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus
•
Insulin requiring for optimal control: Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus
•
Insulin non-requiring: Adequate control achieved with diet, physical
activity and drugs: Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
4
1.3.
Etiological Classification of Diabetes Mellitus
1.3.1. Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus
There is absolute deficiency of insulin due to rapid and progressive destruction
of beta cells in pancreas. The destructive process is generally autoimmune,
characterized by presence of autoantibodies against islet cells, GAD or insulin.
The rate of destruction is rapid generally and is most commonly seen in children
and young adults. There is a genetic predisposition to autoimmune destruction
of beta cells. Some of these patients have other concomitant autoimmune disorder
like Grave’s disease, Hashimotto’s thyroiditis or pernicious anemia.
Type 1 patients are prone to diabetic ketoacidosis.
1.3.2. Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus
This is the most common form of diabetes, characterized by disorder of insulin
action and insulin secretion. These individuals are resistant to insulin action.

action and insulin secretion. These individuals are resistant to insulin action.
These form of diabetes often remain undiagnosed for several years because
hyperglycemia is not severe enough to manifest in symptoms. However,
microvascular and macrovascular changes begin much earlier and initial
presentation may be of one of the long term complications.
Majority of these patients are obese with excess trunkal fat deposition.
1.3.3. Other specific types of Diabetes Mellitus
1.3.3.1. Genetic defects in beta cell function
There are several forms of beta cell function defect resulting in diabetes. The
common genetic defects are:
•
Mutation in chromosome 12 in hepatic nuclear transcription known
as HNF-1 alpha
•
Mutation at glucokinase gene on chromosome 7p
•
Mutation at HNF-4-alpha gene on chromosome 20q
•
Mutation in the IPF-1 on chromosome 13 resulting in pancreatic
agenesis
1.3.3.2. Genetic defect in insulin action

agenesis
1.3.3.2. Genetic defect in insulin action
Genetically determined defects in insulin action are some rare causes of diabetes.
Leprechaunism and Rabson-Menderhall syndrome are syndromes seen in
children with mutation in insulin receptor gene.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
5
1.3.3.3. Diseases of endocrine pancreas
Extensive injury of the pancreas due to any disease process result in diabetes.
Following are some acquired processes:
•
Pancreatitis
•
Trauma
•
Infection
•
Adenocarcinoma
•
Cystic fibrosis
•
Haemochromatosis
It must be noted that even if a small part of pancreas is involved with
adenocarcinoma, it result in diabetes.
1.3.3.4 Endocrinopathies
Excess secretion of hormones that antagonize action of insulin like growth
hormone, cortisol, glucagon, epinephrine and thyroid hormone result in diabetes.
These disease conditions are as follows:
•
Cushing’s Syndrome
•
Acromegaly
•
Pheochromocytoma
•
Glucagonoma
•
Thyrotoxicosis
1.3.3.5 Drugs and Chemicals
Several drugs and chemicals impair insulin secretion. Certain poisons like Vacor
(rat poison) and  pentamidine destroy beta cells. Many drugs and hormones like
nicotinic acid, glucocorticoids impair  insulin action.
1.3.3.6 Infections

nicotinic acid, glucocorticoids impair  insulin action.
1.3.3.6 Infections
Certain viruses like Cytomegalovirus, Mump, Rubella, Coxsackie’s B are known
to be associated  with beta cell destruction.
1.3.3.8 Other uncommon form of immune-mediated diabetes
Diabetes may occur due to several other rare immune mediated disorders that
result in changes  unlike that seen in Type 1 diabetes. Some of the conditions are
as follows:
•
Stiff Man Syndrome:  Stiffness of axial muscles and painful movements
with antibodies against insulin
•
Anti-insulin receptor antibodies causing diabetes.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
6
1.3.3.7 Other genetic syndromes associated with diabetes
Several genetic syndromes result in diabetes. These are Down’s Syndrome,
Turner’s Syndrome, Klienfelter’s Syndrome, and Wolfram’s Syndrome etc.
1.3.4. Gestational Diabetes Mellitus
Carbohydrate intolerance resulting in hyperglycemia of variable severity with
onset or first  recognition in pregnancy is known as Gestational Diabetes Mellitus.
Pregnant women who have Impaired Glucose Tolerance, Impaired Fasting
Glucose and Diabetes Mellitus are classified as Gestational Diabetes Mellitus
and they must have one more OGTT at six  weeks after delivery.
Blood sugar is normally lower in first trimester of pregnancy. If it is detected to
be higher, the pregnant mother possibly was harboring diabetes from pre-
pregnancy period.
Women with a history of large for gestational age baby, older women, previous
history of glucose intolerance and family history of glucose intolerance are at

history of glucose intolerance and family history of glucose intolerance are at
high risk of developing gestational diabetes.
1.4 Diagnostic criteria for Diabetes Mellitus
Diabetes may present with classical symptoms of severe thirst, polyuria and
rapid weight loss.  In these patients, blood glucose concentration is grossly
elevated in the presence of marked glycosuria. Diagnosis is confirmed by  blood
glucose estimation.  Random  whole blood glucose concentrations exceeding
200 mg% or fasting glucose concentration exceeding 126 mg% are considered
diagnostic. When such symptoms and signs are absent and blood glucose levels
are less markedly elevated, estimations of glucose in fasting or after a
carbohydrate load, is necessary to confirm the diagnosis.  A diagnosis of diabetes
in an asymptomatic subject should never be made on the basis of a single blood
glucose value. At least one additional blood glucose test result with a value in
the diabetic range is essential.

the diabetic range is essential.
Criteria for diagnosis of diabetes mellitus:
•
Symptoms of diabetes and random plasma glucose concentration >200
mg/dl. Random is defined as any time of day with regard to time of
last meal. Classical symptoms are polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia
and unexplained weight loss.
•
Fasting blood sugar > 126 mg/dl. Fasting is defined as no calorie
intake for atleast 8 hours.
•
Two hours post-glucose blood sugar > 200 mg/dl during an OGTT.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
7
Commonly oral anhydrous glucose load of 75g in 250 ml of water is given to
adults; fasting and 2 hours post glucose intake blood values of sugar are
considered to be a major diagnostic value.  In children the glucose load is 1.75g/
kg body weight (to a maximum of 75g).
1.5
Impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) and Impaired Fasting
Glucose(IFG)
An intermediate group of subjects are recognized whose glucose level do not
meet the criteria of diabetes but are too high to be considered normal.
•
Normal fasting glucose: FPG <100 mg/dl
•
Impaired Fasting Glucose (IFG): FPG > 110 mg/dl but < 126 mg/dl
•
Diabetes (provisional): FPG >126 mg/dl
With oral glucose tolerance test, following categories of clinical stages are
recognized.
•
2 hour post glucose load < 140 mg /dl : Normal Glucose Tolerance
•
2 hour post glucose load 140- 199 mg/dl: Impaired Glucose Tolerance
(IGT)
•
2 hour post glucose load >200 mg/dl : Provisional Diabetes

(IGT)
•
2 hour post glucose load >200 mg/dl : Provisional Diabetes
1.6. Remember the following
Identify high risk group.  Greater the number of risk factors present in an
individual, greater the chance of that individual developing diabetes. Screen
such individual for diabetes.
Following group of individuals are at risk of developing diabetes
•
Family history of diabetes
•
Obese individuals
•
Age >40 years
•
Person previously identified IGT
•
Individuals using certain drugs like steroid, oral contraceptive, thiazide
diuretic
•
Individuals having Hypertension
•
Individuals having Hyperlipidemia
•
Physically inactivate individuals
•
Women with a history of GDM or birth weight of over 4 kg.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
8
Type 1 Diabetes
Chapter 2

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
9
Type 1 Diabetes
Dr. B.R. Giri  MD.
 Type 1 Diabetes is a chronic and irreversible disease of any age, characterized
by severe deficiency of insulin and dependence on exogenous insulin to sustain
life.  These individuals cannot survive without insulin replacement. They die
due to ketoacidosis.
2.1. Onset
Incidence is approximately 2.5 times higher in the age group of 5-9 years and 3
times higher in the age group of 10-14 years compared with the age group of 0-
4 years.  Incidence increases from birth to 14 years reaching a peak at the age
11-13 years.  Incidence in adult age group is low though it varies from population
to population. A large proportion of Type 1 diabetes   patients (25-50%) are
diagnosed by the age of 15 years whereas only 10-15% manifest with Type 1
diabetes after   40 years of age. Incidence of Type 1 diabetes varies in different

diabetes after   40 years of age. Incidence of Type 1 diabetes varies in different
countries with 0.1 to 4.6 per 100,000 people in China to 49 in 100,000 in Finland.
In most developing countries, Type 1 Diabetes make < 5% of total diabetes
population. This holds true for Bhutan.
Diabetes is seen more commonly in men in Europe and USA and in women in
Asia and Africa.
2.2. Aetiopathogenesis
There is almost complete lack of insulin secreting beta cells and absolute insulin
lack is the key defect in type 1 DM. Hyperglycemia starts abruptly and these
individuals invariably present with typical symptoms of diabetes.
If these individuals do not receive appropriate treatment with insulin, acute
complications, primarily ketoacidosis, set in and result in death of the individual
over a short period of time. Insulin lack is present from the time of clinical onset
of disease and persists throughout the entire clinical course. Some residual beta

of disease and persists throughout the entire clinical course. Some residual beta
cell function may be seen (as demonstrated by C-peptide study) and transient
periods of remission can occur producing the so-called ‘honeymoon’ phase of
the disease.
The decrease or loss  in insulin secretary capacity is due to actual loss of beta
cell mass. Certain genes present in the short arm chromosome number 6 are
found to be associated with Type 1 diabetes.  HLA B8, B15, HLA DR3 and DR
4 are described to be associated with Type 1 diabetes.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
10
2.3. Clinical Features
Classical symptoms of Type 1 diabetes are polydypsia, polyuria, polyphagia,
overwhelming tiredness and significant weight loss.  Other minor symptoms
include muscle cramps, various types of bacterial and fungal infection, burred
vision etc. Nausea, vomiting and drowsiness usually  indicate impending
ketoacidosis and possible coma.  Duration of symptoms is short, lasting usually
2-3 weeks or less.  Some individuals may present with diabetic ketoacidosis for
the first time.
2.3.1. Symptoms linked to osmotic diuresis
Osmotic diuresis result in the following common symptoms
•
Polyuria, nocturia
•
Increased thirst
•
Drowsiness and dehydration
2.3.2. Symptoms and signs linked to lack of insulin
Following are signs and symptoms that are associated with lack of insulin and
resultant  hyperglycemia.
•
Blurred vision
•
Hyperglycemia
•
Extreme fatigue
•
Muscle wasting, weight loss
•
Ketoacidosis
•

•
Blurred vision
•
Hyperglycemia
•
Extreme fatigue
•
Muscle wasting, weight loss
•
Ketoacidosis
•
Skin infections, pruritus vulvae
2.3.3. Symptoms linked to calorie depletion
Prolonged hyperglycemia and lack of insulin lead to progressive calorie depletion
and features associated to this are:
•
Increased appetite
•
Weight loss
2.4. Outcome of Type 1 Diabetes
Majority of Type 1 diabetes die early due to infection and acute metabolic
complications (DKA).  If  not treated properly, they do not live long enough to
develop life threatening vascular complications.  Major causes of death of Type
1 diabetes below the age of 20 is due to acute metabolic complications.  After a
few years, diabetic nephropathy predominates, contributing to 50% of mortality.
Cardiovascular disease accounts for only 10% of death which is 12 times more
than in non diabetic for same age.  Type 1 patients of early onset are also
susceptible to other microvascular complications like retinopathy and neuropathy.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
11
One percent of Type 1 diabetes die in the first year and 33% after 30 years of
diagnosis. Risk of death is similar to non diabetics before 20 years of age but it
increases by 20 fold after 20 years of age. Good glycaemic control and control
of other environmental factors may result in optimal life expectancy.
2.5. Remember the following
•
Immunize all children in their first year of life.
•
Advise exclusive breast feeding to all children for the first 6 months
of life
•
In those children diagnosed as having Type 1 diabetes, explain the
importance of insulin to the parents and advise against omitting the
injection under any circumstance
•
Ensure regular follow up
•
Psychological support and behavior therapy will help the patient party
to adhere to diet and  life style modifications
•
Withdrawal of a single dose of insulin may result in Diabetic
Ketoacidosis

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
12
Type 2 Diabetes
Chapter 3

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
13
Type 2 Diabetes
Dr. B.R. Giri  MD.
Type 2 Diabetes is the commonest form of diabetes, comprising 85 to 95% of
diabetes.
3.1 Background
Type 2 Diabetes is a chronic and complex disorder   which adversely affect both
longevity and quality of life due to multiple, potential serious complications.
Type 2 Diabetes is a nonketotic form  of diabetes and it usually occurs after the
age of 30 years.  A strong genetic predisposition is evident.  Most individuals
are obese and have resistance to insulin action.  Endogenous insulin production
is usually adequate to avoid ketoacidosis, and it is not required for survival.  A
vast majority of diabetics are Type 2. It accounts for more than 95% of diabetes
in Bhutan.  It has a more insidious onset than Type 1 diabetes. It is generally
perceived that Type 2 Diabetes is less a serious disease.
However, there is growing evidence that the pathological features of Type 2

However, there is growing evidence that the pathological features of Type 2
Diabetes are of profound importance in the initiation of a cluster of degenerative
diseases, including cardiovascular disorders.
Type 2 Diabetes is responsible for 85% of all cases of diabetes in developed
countries and in nearly all cases in developing countries.  High prevalence is
seen in populations who have changed from a  traditional life style to a modern
one.
Diagnosis of Type 2 Diabetes can be established when classic symptoms
accompany, and when  diagnostic criteria are met in asymptotic individuals.
Screening is important in patients with a family history of diabetes, significant
obesity, recurrent skin, genital or urinary tract infections, physical inactivity or
birth weight greater than 4 kg.
Symptomatic patients with polyuria, polydipsia, and weight loss can be diagnosed
when random  plasma glucose is > 200 mg/dl.  When glucose is less than 200

when random  plasma glucose is > 200 mg/dl.  When glucose is less than 200
mg/dl, testing as for asymptotic patients is usually warranted.
In asymptotic patients, diagnostic testing should be performed when an abnormal
screening is obtained or when a strong clinical suspicion of diabetes exist.  These
tests should be repeated and abnormal results should be demonstrated on more
than one occasion for establishment of a  diagnosis.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
14
3.2  Type 2 Diabetes: Subgroup
Type 2 diabetes   can be classified into obese and non obese subtypes on the
basis of their body  weight.
3.2.1. Obese Type 2
 In developed countries up to 85% of Type 2 diabetes patients are obese.  These
patients have insensitivity to endogenous insulin that is positively correlated
with presence of an abdominal distribution of fat, producing an abnormally
high waist-hip ratio.  In addition, distended adipocytes and over nourished liver
and muscle cells may also resist the deposition of additional glycogen and
triglycerides in their storage depots.
Hyperplasia of pancreatic beta cells is present and probably account for normal
or exaggerated insulin response to glucose and other stimuli seen in milder forms
of disease.  In more severe cases, secondary (but potentially reversible) failure
of pancreatic cell secretion may result after exposure to persistent hyperglycemia.

of pancreatic cell secretion may result after exposure to persistent hyperglycemia.
This phenomenon has been called “desensitization”.  It is selective for glucose,
and beta-cell recover sensitivity to glucose stimulation once sustained
hyperglycemia is corrected by any form of therapy, including diet, suphonylureas,
insulin and physical activity.
A major cause of observed resistance to insulin in target tissues of obese patients
is believed to be a post receptor defect in insulin action.  This is associated with
over distended storage deposits and a reduced ability to clear nutrients from the
circulation after meals, consequent hyperinsulinism can further enhance insulin
resistance by down regulation of insulin receptors.
Furthermore, when hyperglycemia becomes sustained, a specific glucose
transported protein in insulin target tissue also becomes down regulated after
continuous activation.  This contributes to further defects in post receptor insulin

continuous activation.  This contributes to further defects in post receptor insulin
action, thereby aggravating the hyperglycemia.
When over feeding is corrected, the storage depots become less saturated and
the cycle is interrupted.  Insulin sensitivity improves and is further normalized
by a reduction both of the hyperinsulinism and hyperglycemia.
3.2.2
Non-Obese Type 2 Diabetes
Upto 15% Type 2 Diabetics are non-obese.  In most of these patients, impaired
insulin action at the post receptor level and an absent or delayed early phase of
insulin release in response to glucose is demonstrated.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
15
Hyperglycemia in patients with non-obese Type 2 Diabetics often respond to
dietary therapy or to oral hypoglycemic agents.  Occasionally insulin therapy is
required to achieve satisfactory glycemic control even though it is not needed to
prevent ketoacidosis.
3.3  Clinical Features of Type 2 Diabetes
Type 2 Diabetes may present with characteristic signs and symptoms.  The
presence of obesity or a strong positive family history of mild diabetes also
suggests a high risk for development of Type 2 Diabetes.
3.3.1
Symptoms
Classic symptoms of polyuria, thirst, blurred vision, paresthesia and fatigue are
manifestations of hyperglycemia and osmotic diuresis.  However, many patients
with Type 2 diabetes have an insidious onset of hyperglycemia and may be
relatively asymptomatic initially.  This is particularly true in obese patients,
whose diabetes may be detected on routine laboratory tests.  Chronic skin

whose diabetes may be detected on routine laboratory tests.  Chronic skin
infections are common.  Generalized pruritus and symptoms of vaginitis are
frequently the initial complaints in women.
Diabetes should be suspected in women with chronic candidial vulvo-vaginitis
as well as in those who have delivered large infants (birth weight > 4kg) or have
polyhydramnios, pre-eclampsia or unexplained fetal losses.  Occasionally
patients with previously undiagnosed diabetes may present with impotence.
3.3.2
Signs
Non-obese patients with mild form of diabetes often have no characteristic
physical findings at the time of diagnosis.  Obese diabetics have any variety of
fat distribution. However, diabetes is more often associated in both men and
women with localization of fat deposits on the upper part of the body (particularly
in the abdomen, chest, neck and face) with relatively less fat on the appendices,
which may be quite muscular.  This centripetal fat distribution (android) result

which may be quite muscular.  This centripetal fat distribution (android) result
in high waist to hip ratio.
Mild hypertension may be present in obese diabetics, particularly when android
form of obesity is predominant.   In women, vulval candiadiasis with reddened,
inflamed vulvae may be the initial presentation of Type 2 Diabetes.
3.4. Type 2 diabetes in Children
Most Type 2 Diabetes present after 40 years of age with peak age of onset being
60 to 70 years of age. However, it has been increasingly observed that Type 2

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
16
Diabetes is seen in children and adolescents as well.
Like in the adults, sedentary life-style and obesity are the main contributing
factors of the disease. These children have a strong family history of diabetes
and the disease presents at around 15 to 16 years of age. There is a strong
association with insulin resistance.
3.5. Remember the following
•
Type 2 Diabetes usually occurs above 30 years of age.
•
It has an insidious onset
•
Most Type 2 Diabetics are silent, detected on routine examinations or
present with complications
•
Insulin secretion and action defects present in varying degree


Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
17
Principles of Management of Diabetes
Mellitus
Chapter 4

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
18
Principles of Management of Diabetes
Mellitus
Dr. B.R. Giri  MD.
4.1. Aims
The aims of optimal management of diabetes are as follows
•
Correct  and normalize metabolic derangement
•
Maintain standard body weight
•
Prevent, revert, delay or minimize complications
•
Maintain a healthy & productive life.
4.2. Management of Diabetes entails the following
Diabetes is life long metabolic disorder. It does not get cured hence diabetics
must follow the following to have an optimal control of the disease and prevent
or delay its complications from occurring.
•
Diet regulation
•
Regular scheduled exercise
•
Use of antidiabetic agents
•
Disciplined life style.
4.3. Diet in Diabetes
Diet modification and its regulation is one of the most important aspects in
diabetes management.
a) To normalize and maintain normal blood sugar level to prevent or
delay complication
b) To meet nutritional needs
c) Maintain ideal body weight

delay complication
b) To meet nutritional needs
c) Maintain ideal body weight
d) To maintain normal growth rate
e) To achieve optimum nutrition in pregnancy and lactation.
Refined carbohydrates like glucose, sugar, sweets should be avoided.  Fat and
proteins can be consumed as usual unless restricted.  A sedentary person needs
30kcal/kg body weight whereas a hard worker requires 35kcal/kg of calories a
day.  Underweight diabetes will require higher calories and obese require lesser
(800-1200kcal/day).  Sufficient vegetables and fibers in diet are recommended.
Suggested calorie distribution is 12-20% from protein, 50-60% from
carbohydrate and 20-30% from fat (<10% from saturated fat).  Diabetics should
know the importance of diet.  Diet should be reviewed if blood sugar remain
uncontrolled, weight loss or gain occur.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
19
4.4. Physical Activity
Physical activity controls hyperglycemia, hyperlipidaemia, sensitizes insulin
receptors, improves circulation, prevents atherosclerosis, reduces blood pressure,
increases work capacity and the person feels a sense of well being and has
improved quality of life.  Physical activity reduces  need of antidiabetic agents.
Good glycemic control can be achieved by a delicate balance of diet management,
physical activity, relaxation and hypoglycemic agents.  Once blood sugar control
is achieved, a balance of these activities should be maintained to achieve
continued glycemic control unless other emergent situations arise like acute
infections.
4.5.
Use of antidiabetic medications
All Type 1 Diabetics need daily insulin supplementation. Diabetics must learn
to use insulin by themselves. Most Type 2 Diabetics require taking oral blood
sugar lowering agents, the dosage of which is adjusted according to blood sugar

sugar lowering agents, the dosage of which is adjusted according to blood sugar
control. Use of these agents can result in serious complications like
hypoglycemia, the features of which patients and immediate relatives must
know.
4.6.
Disciplined life style
Diabetes is life long metabolic disorder. Control of blood sugar will cease to
occur if one of the three aspects of its management viz. dietary control, physical
activity or use of medication is discontinued. Hence diabetics themselves and
their family members must understand the situation and work towards continuing
diabetes control measures for life time.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
20
Diet in Diabetes
Chapter 5

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
21
Diet in Diabetes
Dr. B.R. Giri  MD.
Food is an important part in the management of diabetes. This has been realized
for a long time as the cornerstone of diabetes management. Diabetes is a life
long disease and hence, diet modification must be carried on for lifetime. The
nutritional needs of a diabetic remain the same as when he/she has been in non-
diabetic state. A nutritionally balanced diet is required in a diabetic as in a non-
diabetic. A non-diabetic can take any type of food at any time of the day in  any
amount and it will not cause abrupt rise in blood sugar whereas a diabetic must
be careful about his/her diet as this can result in high post-food rise in blood
sugar.
5.1. Modern eating
One notices changing eating habits with improvement in socio-economic
conditions and urbanization. This plays a major role in causation of diabetes in
an individual who has other risk factors for diabetes.

an individual who has other risk factors for diabetes.
5.1.1. Factors responsible in changed eating habit and life-style
•
Shift in (urban) eating preferences
-
Increased income has a direct bearing on family’s expenditure on
food.
-
Desire for quality family time culminating in less home cooking
and eating outside
-
Availability of processed food
-
Mass media campaigns
•
Increase in sedentary life-style
5.1.2. What is wrong with modern diet?
There is a direct mismatch between calorie need and calorie intake in modern
diet and hence extra calories get deposited as fat in the body.
Modern living with limited physical activity does not need the amount of food
one   eats nor food which is:
1. Refined – high simple sugar
2. Rich in Calorie
3. Rich in fat
This is the type of food that is eaten normally and it has direct health bearing.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
22
5.1.3. Social influences in eating habits
Society greatly influences eating habit. Food is served in almost all social
occasion. It is customary to serve food in excess.
•
Food serves as a source of pleasure in life
Family get- together and celebrations like birthdays, anniversaries,
festivals, or success are celebrated with rich food.
•
Being overweight or well fed is recognised as a sign of prosperity in
many societies.
•
Hospitality result in over feeding.
•
Calorie dense foods like   oily, fatty and sweet  food are perceived as
the best food
•
Concomitant alcohol use result in over eating
•
Modern life requires eating out
- Work, parties
- Too tired to cook, so  “take home” meal is ordered
5.1.4. Unhealthy food habits
Increased fat and carbohydrate intake result in excessive weight gain in an
individual. Certain food item that have large amount of fat and carbohydrate
that have to be avoided are as follows.
•

that have to be avoided are as follows.
•
Curries cooked in excess of oil
•
Deep fried foods
•
Fast foods
•
Too sweet beverages
•
Sweets, biscuits, cake, chocolate, sweet meat
•
Excess of refined food  e.g. sugar based
•
Excess of  fizzy drinks
•
Increased intake of processed foods
•
Excess consumption of polished rice
•
Increased intake of biscuits, bread, mixtures, soft drinks
•
Less intake of vegetables and fruits
•
Excess of salt (in processed food  )
•
Increasing alcohol consumption
If unhealthy eating and life style is causing this massive epidemic of diabetes
and obesity then it should be possible to prevent it by a healthy life-style.
5.2. Importance of Nutrition management
Diabetes is a metabolic disorder affecting food (carbohydrate, fat and protein)
metabolism. Nutrition therapy should be an integral part of its management.
Diet management is the corner stone in diabetes management. It is an effective

Diet management is the corner stone in diabetes management. It is an effective
tool in combination with physical exercise and  is preferable to pharmacological
therapy to begin with, for patients with IGT,  those at risk of, or are in early

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
23
stages of Type 2 diabetes.
Inappropriate nutrition can make best planned pharmacological intervention
ineffective.
5.3. Principles of Nutrition management
Following are some important principles of nutrition management.
•
Provide appropriate energy and nutrients for health, growth and activity
•
Preserve social and psychological well-being
•
Reduce symptoms of diabetes
- Attain and maintain euglycemia
- Prevent hypoglycemia and hyperglycaemia
•
Achieve and maintain acceptable body weight
•
Attain and maintain normal lipid levels
•
Attain and maintain acceptable blood pressure levels
•
Prevent, delay or treat micro and macrovascular complications of
diabetes
•
Complement drug and insulin therapy
- Nutrition advice cannot be independent of drug/insulin regimen
5.3.1 How can these be achieved
Nutrition management can be achieved by involving the patient as well as the

Nutrition management can be achieved by involving the patient as well as the
family members. It is crucial to involve the family members as without their
support, patient alone can not  sustain life style changes required of him/her. All
nutritional advice should be patient centered.
•
Individualized assessment
•
Appropriate for age, sex, weight, life-style, personal, economic, social
and cultural circumstances
•
Takes into account readiness to change
5.3.2. Diet recommendations in diabetes
Food contains calories through carbohydrate, fats and protein. Salt and important
vitamins and minerals are also supplied through food. Diabetics require the
same food as when diabetes was not contracted. However, proportion of different
food must be readjusted. Following are recommended food allowance for people
with diabetes. However, food must be individualized.
•
Carbohydrates: 50-65% (mostly starchy) of daily calorie requirement
•
Fats: 20-35% of daily calorie requirement
- saturated fat <10%

•
Fats: 20-35% of daily calorie requirement
- saturated fat <10%
- polyunsaturated fat <10%
- monounsaturated fat >10%
- cholesterol < 300 mg/day

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
24
•
Protein: 10-20% of daily calorie requirement  (0.8 g/kg/day)
•
Sodium:  < 3000 mg /day
•
Vitamins & Minerals: with balanced diet, supplementation not needed
•
Dietary fibers: minimum 20g /1000 kcal
5.4 Carbohydrate recommendations in diabetes
Carbohydrate is the primary source of calories in diet.
•
50-65% of energy must be derived from carbohydrate
•
The amount and source of carbohydrate should be considered when
planning meal
•
Carbohydrates should come mainly from
- whole grains (wheat, rice, corn, millet, maize, buckwheat)
- legumes, pulses
- fruits and vegetables
5.4.1. Sucrose (Sugar)
White or table sugar is constituted of sucrose. This has either to be avoided or
used in moderation.
•
Sucrose intake is allowed up to 10% of total daily energy
•
Evidence suggests that dietary sucrose does not increase glycemia
more than isocaloric amounts of starch.
•
Excess sucrose must be substituted for other carbohydrate sources in

•
Excess sucrose must be substituted for other carbohydrate sources in
food/meal plan or, it must be adequately covered with insulin or other
glucose lowering medication.
•
Advice against sugar in drinks as this result in rapid increase in blood
sugars.
•
Encourage use of low or reduced or no added sugar products
5.4.2. Foods rich in Carbohydrate
Following food items contain ample amount of carbohydrate. These have to be
used in moderation.
•
Rice, puffed rice, rice flakes (ship) and potatoes, zaw
•
Wheat flour, maize flour, millets, buckwheat flour
•
Fruits, fruit juice and vegetables
•
Potatoes, tapioca, sweet potatoes
•
Bread, cake, biscuits
•
Pulses -whole and split
•
Lentils,
•
Soft drink, fizzy drink

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
25
5.4.3. Food rich in simple sugars
These following food contain simple sugar. Simple sugars are readily absorbed
from gut and result in post food hyperglycemia.
•
Sugar, sugar cane juice
•
Sweets and sweet meat
•
Biscuit
•
Sugar in tea and coffee
•
Milk dessert
•
Soft drink
5.5. Protein recommendation in diabetes
Protein  is normally required for growth and maintenance of wear and tear besides
other vital functions of body.
•
High intake of animal protein is not encouraged because these foods
are also high in fat
•
Protein must constitute 10 - 20% of total calories per day similar to
normal population
•
Recent recommendation of protein in diabetic is 0.8 grams /kilogram
body weight/day
Protein requirement is increased in children, pregnant and lactating mother and
in certain medical  conditions.
5.6. Fat recommendation in diabetes
High fat diet is related to hyperlipedemia and other related diseases. Fat intake

High fat diet is related to hyperlipedemia and other related diseases. Fat intake
need to be individualized. Fat is generally saturated and unsaturated. Animal fat
is mostly saturated. Palm and coconut oil are saturated too. Olive and peanut oil
are monounsaturated and have least effect on blood lipid. Polyunsaturated fat in
vegetable oils such as corn, sunflower, and these probably  lowers plasma
cholesterol level.
•
Diet should be low in fat with particular emphasis on the type of fatty
acid
•
Fat must constitute 20-35% of total calories
o
 Low Saturated < 10%
o
 Low Polyunsaturated (PUFA n - 6) up to 10 %
o
 High Monounsaturated (MUFA) > 10%
o
 Low Trans fatty acid intake
o
Low cholesterol  <  200 mg/day (less animal products, cheese, egg
yolk, butter)

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
26
5.6.1. Types of fat
Food may contain visible fat that is fat added during cooking and invisible fat
that is naturally present in food.
Different types of fat and food that contain these fat are as follows:
•
Saturated fat : red meat, butter, cheese, margarine, hydrogenated fat,
ghee (clarified butter), whole milk, cream, lard
•
Polyunsaturated : Safflower oil, sunflower oil, corn oil
•
Monounsaturated : Olive oil, canola oil,  rape seed oil, groundnut oil,
mustard oil, sesame oil
•
Cholesterol : Red meat, egg yolk, cheese, butter, cream, organ meat,
ghee (clarified butter)
•
Trans-fatty acids  : Biscuit/cookie, cake, sweet meat, ready to eat
snacks
Trans fatty acid is formed when liquid fat, such as oil, is chemically
hydrogenated. Trans fat raise LDL cholesterol and lowers HDL cholesterol.
Hydrogenated fat like dalda is the main source of trans-fat consumed. Smaller
amount of naturally occurring trans-fat is in meat and milk.

amount of naturally occurring trans-fat is in meat and milk.
Table 5.1 : Fat and oil
      Fat Distribution in commonly used oil. Fatty-acid (grams/100grams)
Saturated
MUFA
PUFA (_-6)      PUFA (_-3)
Fatty Acid
Olive oil
13
76
10
1
Peanut oil
18
48
34
<0.5
Canola oil
6
58
26
10
Rapeseed oil
8
70
12
10
Sesame oil
15
42
42
1
Corn oil
12
32
55
1
Cottonseed oil
22
25
52
1
Soyabean oil
15
27
53
5
Sunflower oil
13
27
60
<0.5
Safflower oil
13
17
70
<0.5
Coconut
90
7
2
<0.5
Vanaspati
24
19
3
<0.5
Ghee
65
32
2
<1.0

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
27
5.7. Fibre
Dietary fibre is a portion of plant food and it is not digested in human intestine.
It has various important properties like viscosity, water holding capacity, bile
acid binding capacity. Degradation of the fibre by microbes in colon forms gel
in  gastrointestinal tract that slows absorption of glucose and lipid, slower stomach
emptying, delay intestinal transit. Fibre rich diet improve glucose tolerance,
lower total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol and triglyceride.
A high fibre diet is recommended in all diabetics.
•
Fibre is recommended similar to  normal individuals
Total of 20-35 grams per day
10 - 25 grams of soluble fibre daily
•
Insoluble fiber sources:
wheat bran, whole grain, seed, fruit & vegetable
•
Soluble fibre sources:
Legume (bean), oat bran, barley, apple, citrus fruit, potato
5.8. Minerals and vitamins in diabetes
Minerals and vitamins are contained in food that one eats every day. However,

Minerals and vitamins are contained in food that one eats every day. However,
supplementation is necessary under certain circumstances
•
Multivitamin supplementation is needed for
Pregnant woman
Lactating woman
Elderly
People on strict energy restriction
Critically ill
Renal disease
Poor metabolic control
Nutritional deficiency
5.9. Trace elements
A balanced diet is required to supply all minerals and trace elements for health.
•
They are inorganic substances that regulate many vital processes within
the body
•
They are found in blood, enzymes, hormones, bones, skeleton, teeth
and tissue fluid
•
Calcium supplementation is required for elderly. A daily intake of
1,000–1,500 mg is required.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
28
5.10. Alcohol
Alcohol must not be consumed more than recommended for a healthy individual.
Chronic ingestion of alcohol can result in chronic pancreatitis and diabetes.
•
Alcohol intake must be same  as for  general population
- one drink per day for women
- two drinks per day for men
•
Alcohol should be consumed with meal to prevent hypoglycemia
•
Alcohol must be avoided in  pregnancy, pancreatitis, severe
dyslipidemia, neuropathy and alcohol abuse
5.11. Planning meal
Every diabetic must have his/her meal planned. The meal must not be exotic but
should take into consideration the patients habits, likes and dislikes and cultural
and individual acceptability.
•
Determine patient’s food habit by 24 hour recall of food frequency
and ascertain different food the patient was generally taking.
•
Estimate calorie requirement of the patient by BMI, physical activity
level and any special conditions like illness, pregnancy, lactation.
•

level and any special conditions like illness, pregnancy, lactation.
•
Diabetics must know the importance of diet from the time of detection
of disease.
•
“Once a diabetic, one is always a diabetic for life”. So proper education
is most essential part of management of diabetes
•
If a diabetic is unable to take food, liquid food like milk, barley, soup,
‘thuep’ must be given at hourly interval.
Table 5.2 Calorie requirement  for adults
Persons with Diabetes                                        Daily Calorie/Kg body weight
Sedentary with normal body weight
(BMI 18.5 to 25)
30
Moderate To strenuous physical activity with
normal BMI
35 to 50
Pregnancy  First trimester
28 to 32
Pregnancy  Second trimester
36 to 38
Pregnancy  Third trimester
36 to 38
Lactating
36 to 38
Obese, Sedentary women BMI >25
20

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
29
Underweight: BMI less than  18.5
Add 300 to 500 calorie / day to basal requirement.
Juvenile:
Child one year age:  1000 to 1100 calorie/day
Child more than one year: Add 100 calories for each year
Add or subtract 25% of total calculated calories for activity or inactivity
respectively. Add 25% of calorie requirement for age for adolescence.
Gestational Diabetes Mellitus
Add 300 calories/day over basal allowance from second trimester. If obese, do
not add calories from the requirement. If underweight, add calories and at least
20 gms. proteins
Determine the amount, type and distribution of fat, carbohydrate and protein.
Desirable body weight in adult
BMI
20 to 23
Ideal
< 16
 Underweight
16  to 18.5
Probably underweight
18.5  to 25
Probably well nourished
25 to 30
Possibly obese
>30
Obese
5.12. Dietary strategy
5.12.1. Type 2 Diabetes/Impaired Glucose Tolerance
5.12.1.1. Obese/ Overweight (BMI>25)
•

5.12.1. Type 2 Diabetes/Impaired Glucose Tolerance
5.12.1.1. Obese/ Overweight (BMI>25)
•
Hypocalorie diet with high fibre.
•
Same distribution of carbohydrate, protein and fat in diet as for others.
5.12.1.2. Normal weight (BMI 18.5 to 25)
•
Adequate calories and adequate spacing between meals.
5.12.1.3. Underweight (BMI< 18.5)
•
Extra calorie
•
Small frequent feeding

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
30
5.12.2. Type 1 Diabetes
5.12.2.1. Juvenile
•
High calories and protein
•
If obese, less calorie from usual requirement
•
Increased frequency of feeding
•
Adjustment of calories each year
5.12.2.2. Adult
•
Adequate calories
•
Low calories for obese
•
Adequate spacing between meals
•
Even distribution of calories in meals
•
Almost same amount of food every day
•
Keep timing of meals constant everyday


Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
31
Oral Hypoglycemic Agents (OHA)
Chapter 6

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
32
Oral Hypoglycemic Agents (OHA)
 Dr. B.R. Giri  MD.
6.1 Introduction
Near total insulin deficiency occur in Type 1 Diabetes and hence, this condition
requires replacement of insulin. In Type 2 Diabetes, relative insulin deficiency
occur. There is significant insulin resistance as well. Insulin resistance and
deficiency in different degree in combination are the major components in
pathogenesis of Type 2 Diabetes.
There is gradual but progressive loss of beta cell function in the course of natural
history of Type 2 Diabetes that dictates the physician to change treatment from
time to time.
Table  6.1. Target of control in diabetes
Self monitored blood glucose
>50% of self monitored blood glucose
values within target range
Blood glucose
Pre-meal : 80 to 126 mg/dl
Post-meal: (2 hrs. after meal):<160 mg/dl
Bed time: 100 to 160 mg/dl
Glycosylated Haemoglobin
Normal 6%, Target : <7%
(HbA1c)
Frequency every  3 months
Blood Pressure

Glycosylated Haemoglobin
Normal 6%, Target : <7%
(HbA1c)
Frequency every  3 months
Blood Pressure
<130/80 mm Hg.
Lipid
LDL  <100 mg/dl,
HDL > 40  mg/dl,
Triglyceride <150 mg/dl
6.2. Goals of Management
Oral hypoglycemic agents are those drugs which when given orally in patients
with Diabetes Mellitus can effectively correct the derangement of carbohydrate,
protein and fat metabolism developed during disease process.
The goals of management of diabetes are
•
Relief of symptoms
•
Correction of blood chemistry value
•
Slowing and /or prevent macro and micro vascular complications
•
Restoration of sense of well being
•
Maintenance of ideal body weight
•
Good pregnancy outcome

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
33
Hepatic
Glucose
production
Muscle
glucose
uptake
6.3. Classification of oral hypoglycemic agents
There are three categories of oral hypoglycaemic agents available.
•
Insulin secretagogue: Improves insulin availability in the body.
♦
Sulphonyluria
♦
Non-sulphonyluria
- Repaglinide
- Nateglinide
•
Insulin sensitizer: Improve insulin action or reduce insulin resistance
♦
Metformin
♦
Thiazolidinedione
•
Alpha glucosidase inhibitor: Reduce glucose absorption from the
gastrointestinal  tract.
6.4. Site of action of Oral Hypoglycaemic Agents
 Digestion
Diet
  Acarbose
Glimeperide
Insulin
Glimperide
Sulphonyl
 Repaglinide
Ureas
No drug is available which can act at all points spontaneously
Bedtime Insulin Extracellular glucose
Pancreatic
beta cell
secretion
Metformin
Glitazone
“Glitazone”

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
34
6.5. Insulin secretogogues
6.5.1. Sulfonyluria
6.5.1.1. Absorption
Sulfonylurias are completely absorbed from gastrointestinal tract into  blood.
Like other drugs, absorption process may be delayed by fiber-rich diet.  In blood
up to 75-95% of drug is bound to protein.  So bio-availability may be influenced
by protein deficiency and by drugs competing for the same albumin.
Sulfonyluria metabolites are excreted primarily by kidney.  In liver and kidney
diseases the drug or its metabolites may accumulate in blood and thus increase
risk of prolonged hypoglycemia.
Table 6.2 Pharmacokinetics of current Sulfonyluria
Drug
Peak level in plasma(hrs)
Duration of action(hrs)
Chlorpropamide
2.4
60
Glipizide
1.3
Up to 24
Glybenclamide
4
Up to 24
Gliburide
4
24
Gliclizide
2-3
Around 20
Glimeperide
2-3
Around 20
Table 6.3 Pharmacokinetics of current Sulfonyluria
Drugs
Metabolites
Dose/day
Execretion
Chlorpropramide
Active
1
Kidney 100%

Drugs
Metabolites
Dose/day
Execretion
Chlorpropramide
Active
1
Kidney 100%
Glipizide
Inactive
1-2
Kidney 80%, bile 20%
Glybenclamide
Weakly active
1
Kidney 50%, bile 50%
Gliburide
Weakly active
1
Kidney 50%, bile 50%
Gliclazide
Inactive
1-2
Kidney 60-70%
Glimperide
Weakly active
1
Kidney 60%, bile 40%

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
35
 6.5.1.2. Mechanism of action  of Sulfonyluria (Glibenclamide)
Sulfonylurias stimulate beta cells to secrete insulin.  It increases beta cell
sensitivity to glucose.  It does not increase synthesis of insulin but it helps release
of stored insulin.  Sulfonylurias inhibit secretion of glucagon from pancreas.  It
helps in decreasing insulin resistance.  It increases tissue sensitivity to insulin.
It also increases hepatic and muscle sensitivity to insulin.
6.5.1.3. Dose schedule
Most Sulphonyluria have long duration of action. Hence, single dose schedule
is adequate. However, when morning dose exceed 2 tablets, a small dose in the
evening must be added.
6.5.1.4. Side Effects
Most important side effect of sulphonyluria is hypoglycemia. In situations of
renal failure, hypoglycemia is a troubling side effect.
6.5.1.5. Contraindication
Long acting sulphonyluria can not be used even in mild renal failure (S. creatinine
> 2.0 mg/dl)

Long acting sulphonyluria can not be used even in mild renal failure (S. creatinine
> 2.0 mg/dl)
6.5.2. Non-Sulphonyluria secretogogue
These drugs are secretogogue without sulphonyl moiety and are termed non
sulphonyluria.
The secretogouges that are in use are
•
Repaglinide
•
Nateglinide
Mechanism of Action:
6.5.2.1. Absorption
•
These drugs are rapidly absorbed and appears in blood in 5 to 10
minutes following ingestion
6.5.2.2.  Metabolism
•
Non-secretogouges are metabolized in liver by cytochrome P450
system and 60% excreted in bile
•
Elimination occur through faeces in over  90%, Urine 8%, Unchanged
in faeces 2% . It is independent of renal excretion. Elimination half
life is 0.5 to 1.4 hours.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
36
6.5.2.3.  Onset of action
Action begins within 30 minutes of ingestion. The duration of action lasts for 2
to 3 hours.
6.5.2.4. Dose
•
Ripaglinide: 0.5 to 4 mg per dose, total 12 mg per day, thrice a day
before major meals. Should not receive medicine if meal is skipped.
•
Nateglinide: 120 mg before each major meal, three times a day
Advantages
•
Correction of post prandial hyperglycemia is better
•
Hypoglycemia is averted
•
Can be given in mild to moderate renal failure
6.6. Biguanide
6.6.1. Metformin
Actions of biguanides are not well understood but possible mechanisms are as
follows.  Bigunides reduces gastrointestinal absorption of glucose and enhances
uptake of glucose by peripheral tissues in presence of available insulin.  It also
reduces gluconeogenesis and therefore lower hepatic glucose output.  Bigunides
stimulate anaerobic glycolysis and increases insulin receptor binding.  Metformin

stimulate anaerobic glycolysis and increases insulin receptor binding.  Metformin
reduces raised glucose levels but does not normally cause hypoglycemia
6.6.1. 1. Absorption
•
Most absorption occurs through gastrointestinal tract.
•
20 to 30% excreted in stool
•
Absorption occur  in 1 to 2.6 hour
6.6.1. 1. Metabolism
•
Metformin is not metabolized in body
6.6.1. 1. Side effects
•
Transient gastrointestinal upset, metallic taste, nausea, anorexia
•
Abdominal discomfort, cramp, vomiting, flatulence, diarrhoea
•
Lactic acidosis predisposed by renal failure, hepatic failure, alcohol
abuse
6.6.1. 1. Contraindication
•
Renal impairment with serum creatinine >1.4 mg/dl
•
Hepatic dysfunction with ALT > 2 times of normal
•
History of acidosis

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
37
6.6.1. 1. Dosage
•
250 mg to 3 grams in 3 divided doses half an hour before meals
Advantage
•
No hypoglycemia
6.6.2. Thiazolidinediones
Following are some thiazolidinediones that are used in clinical practice.
•
Rosiglitazone
•
Pioglitazone
•
Troglitazone
Anti hyperglycemic effect of these drugs are:
•
Dose dependent
•
Glucose lowering effect is dependent on availability of insulin
•
No effect on insulin secretion
•
Improves insulin sensitivity
- Increase peripheral  level glucose disposal by adipose tissue and
   muscles
- Decreased hepatic glucose output at the level of liver
6.6.2.1. Absorption
•
Peak levels are observed within 2 hours in fasting state and 3 to 4
hours after food.
Mechanism of Action:
6.6.2.2.  Metabolism
It is extensively metabolized in liver.
6.6.2.3.  Excretion
•
Most excretion, 70 to 85% occur through bile
•
Renal excretion 15 to 30%
•
Serum half life 3- 7 hours
•
Duration of action is upto 24 hours

•
Renal excretion 15 to 30%
•
Serum half life 3- 7 hours
•
Duration of action is upto 24 hours
6.6.2.4. Contraindications
Thiazolidinediones must not be used under following circumstances.
•
Liver disease
•
Pregnancy
•
Lactation
6.6.2.5. Dosage
•
Single dose 15 to 45 mg half an hour before meal

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
38
6.6.2.6. Side effect
•
Headache, myalgia, anemia, weight gain, edema
6.7.
Alpha-Glucosidase inhibitor
Following are some of the commonly used alpha-Glucosidase inhibitors.
•
Acarbose
•
Voglibose
•
Miglitol
6.7.1
Mechanism of action
•
Inhibit carbohydrate absorption by selectively inhibiting
disaccharidases in intestinal brush borders.
•
Oligosaccharides can not be digested and absorbed hence post-prandial
blood sugars not raised
6.7.2. Absorption
•
Binds reversibly in the intestinal epithelial wall
•
Almost no systemic absorption
6.7.3. Side effects
•
Abdominal bloating
•
Diarrhoea
•
Mal-absorption
6.7.4. Contraindications
•
Hepatic dysfunction
•
Renal impairment
6.7.5. Dosage
•
25 to 100 mg per dose three times daily
6.8.
Remember the following
Ascertain type of diabetes milletus and reserve function of beta cells of pancreas.
Evaluate indications and contraindications of oral hypoglycemic agents for  the

Evaluate indications and contraindications of oral hypoglycemic agents for  the
particular patient.  Ensure dietary compliance and physical activities.  Start with
low dose of sulphonyluria in the morning.  Try to control glycemic status slowly.
Increase the dose with small increment at 7 days interval or more to a miximum
morning dose.  When morning fasting glucose is not under acceptable level,
add small dose at night.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
39
Insulin and its Complications
Chapter 7

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
40
Insulin and its Complications
 Dr. B.R. Giri  MD.
7.1.
Insulin
Insulin is a protein consisting of 51 amino acids with 2 peptide chains, A-chain
with 21 amino acids and B chain with 30 amino acids.  The two chains are
connected together by 2 disulfide bridges.
7.2.
Sources of Insulin
•
Pancreas derived bovine and porcine insulin
•
Human Insulin.
a) Derived from human cadaveric pancreas
b) End of end synthesis from amino acid.  About 200 steps are there
in its    formation, so supply is inadequate and cost is more.
c) Enzymatic semisynthetic process by which porcine insulin is con-
verted to human type
d) Bio-synthesis from E.coli, S.C. yeast by employing recombinant
DNA technology.
Portion of human insulin gene are introduced to plasmids of E.coli.  A &
B chains are produced separately and are subsequently linked by disulfide
bonds.
7.3.
Preparations and Types  of Insulin
Type preparation
Action onset (hr)
Peak Profile in hr.

7.3.
Preparations and Types  of Insulin
Type preparation
Action onset (hr)
Peak Profile in hr.
Maximum
duration of action
Regular (plain)
1/2-1
2-4
6-8
Lente
2-5
6-14
18-24
Semi Lente
1-3
6-12
12-18
Ultra Lente
4-6
18-24
36-40
Mixtard
1/2-1
6-12
18-24
7.3.1
Short acting (Soluble, Regular, Plain)
Regular insulin has most rapid and shortest duration of action.  For optimal
effect, it is best taken before meal.  It is the only insulin that can be used
intravenously.  Therefore it is the insulin used in treatment of DKA, surgery and
shock.  It can be given subcutaneously in combination with an intermediate or
long acting preparation.  When given S/C, action starts within 30-45 min; peaks
at 2-4 hrs and duration of action lasts for about 6 hrs.
Table 7.1: Types of Insulin

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
41
7.3.2. Lente Insulin
Lente insulin is intermediate acting insulin.  Lente insulin has onset of action of
about 2.5 hrs, peak between 6-14 hrs. or longer.  Intermediate insulin is given
either once or twice a day.
7.3.3. Mixed Insulin
Premixed insulin 30 : 70 (short acting : long acting) are available for Bhutanese
patients  routinely. However it is also available as 50 : 50(short acting : long
acting)
7.3.4. Insulin Concentrations
•
Most widely available and used is 100 IU/ml
•
Uncommonly used are 40 IU/ml
Insulin must be administered by insulin syringes calibrated to the
concentration of insulin being used.
7.4. Storage of Insulin
Insulin can be kept at 2-8oC without loss of its efficacy as long as 3 months.
Freezing is avoided.  It should be kept away from light.  It may be kept at 25oC
for one month without loss of potency.
•
Never freeze insulin
•
Avoid direct sunlight or warming in hot climate
•

•
Never freeze insulin
•
Avoid direct sunlight or warming in hot climate
•
Store unused insulin in fridge at 2 to 8oC
•
After opening an insulin vial, it should be discarded after 3 months if
kept at 2 to 8o C or after a month if kept at room temperature
•
In hot climate, transport and store it in cooling jar, thermos flask with
cold water or wet cloth wrapped around
7.5. Route of Administration
1.      Sub-cutaneous route - usually all routine patient taking insulin.
2.      Intravenous route - during Diabetic Ketoacidosis.
•
Front or  lateral aspect of thigh are preferred site for ease of
administration and slower absorption of longer acting insulin
•
 Lower abdomen below the umbilicus is the usual preferred site of
injection when faster absorptions is required. It is least affected by
physical activity
•
Buttocks, upper outer quadrant  may be useful in  small children
•
Lateral aspect of arm is another preferred site of administration

•
Lateral aspect of arm is another preferred site of administration
It must be remembered that insulin is injected at different sites on
different occasions, rotating around different site and returning to
the original site only after a month.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
42
7.5.1. Problems with insulin injections
Insulin administration is fraught with certain problems. These have to be looked
for at periodic intervals and remedial measures taken.
•
Hypersensitivity: Hypersensitivity to insulin injections is uncommon.
However, when it occurs, it can either be local or systemic. With the
newer human insulin it is extremely rare.
•
Lipohypertrophy: There will be accumulation of fat and fibrous tissues
at the site of injection. Avoid injecting repeatedly at the same site.
•
Lipoatrophy: Atrophy of fat at injection site can occur. However, this
is extremely uncommon
•
Painful injections: If injection is deep to infiltrate muscle, it can be
painful. Please check that the patient receives subcutaneous injection.
•
Insulin leakage is difficult to avoid. Withdraw needle slowly and apply
gentle pressure over the injection site.
•
Bruising and bleeding are commoner with intramuscular injections
•

•
Bruising and bleeding are commoner with intramuscular injections
•
Bubbles in insulin must be removed
7.6.  Indications for Insulin
•
 All patients of Type 1 Diabetes
•
Patients of any age, acutely decompensated state, DKA, lactic acidosis,
or any emergencies like acute MI, surgery, infection etc.
•
Pregnancy and diabetes
•
Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus
-
Drug failure when, OHAs, diet control and physical activity do
not keep sugar levels under control.
-
Emergency situation like surgery, trauma, infections like
tuberculosis, boil, carbuncle, hepatitis.
-
Patients with complications like retinopathy, nephropathy.
-
Patients with very high blood glucose at presentation
7.7.  Goal of Insulin Therapy
•
To preserve life of diabetic patient and to relieve patients from
symptoms.
•
To enable patient to have as normal and productive life as possible.
•
To establish and maintain good metabolic control
•
To prevent or at least delay long term complications of Diabetes.
 7.8. Target of Control

•
To prevent or at least delay long term complications of Diabetes.
 7.8. Target of Control
Fasting blood glucose value should be kept between 90-110 mg/dl and post
prandial blood glucose value of below 140 mg/dl and HbA1 C < 6%.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
43
7.9.
Daily Requirements.
Daily insulin production in normal person ranges between 24-30 units. Type 1
diabetes patients require generally between 0.5-1.0 insulin units/kg/day.
7.10. Principles of insulin therapy
•
To provide sufficient insulin throughout 24 hours to cover basal
requirement
•
To deliver higher bolus of insulin in an attempt to match the glycaemic
effect of meals
7.11. Frequently used schedule for Insulin Administration
•
Two injections daily of a mixture of short and intermediate acting
insulin (Mixtard) before breakfast and main evening meal
Combines insulin: Lente and Regular.
AM dose : Lente + Regular (2/3rd of total daily dose)
PM dose : Lente + Regular (1/3rd of total daily dose)
For both AM and PM does, 2/3rd of total dose as lente and 1/3rd as
plain.
•
Three injections daily, using a mixture of short and intermediate acting
insulin before breakfast, short acting insulin alone before afternoon

insulin before breakfast, short acting insulin alone before afternoon
meal and a long acting insulin at bedtime
•
Basal bolus regimen, of short acting insulin 20 to 30 minutes before
main meals (breakfast, lunch and main evening meal), intermediate
or long acting insulin at bed time.
•
Insulin pump dosages with fixed or variable basal dose and bolus
doses with meals
7.12. Guidelines on dosage
•
During partial remission phase,  daily insulin requirement is < 0.5 IU/
kg/day
•
Pre-pubertal children usually require 0.7 to 1.0 IU/kg  of insulin per
day
•
During puberty, insulin requirements may rise above 1 IU/kg/day
•
Adults require 0.2 to 0.5 IU/kg insulin per day
•
Insulin adjustment must be made until target blood glucose is achieved
7.13. Remember the following in using Insulin
•
In case of elevated fasting blood sugar, increase pre-dinner or pre-bed
time intermediate insulin.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
44
•
For rise in post breakfast blood sugar, increase pre-breakfast short
acting insulin.
•
For elevated blood glucose before evening meal, increase pre breakfast
intermediate acting insulin or increase dose of pre-lunch short or rapid
acting insulin if on basal bolus regimen
•
If a rise in blood sugar after evening meal is noticed, increase pre-
evening meal short or rapid-acting insulin
Furthermore
•
Unexplained hyperglycemia requires re-evaluation of insulin therapy
•
Hyper or hypoglycemia occurring in the presence of intercurrent illness
requires “management of sick days”
•
For alterations in day to day activities, insulin must be altered
accordingly
•
Special advise is required in case of travel, fasting, change in activities
and routine
•
Diabetics on twice a day regimen require 2/3 of their daily requirement
of insulin in the morning and 1/3 in the evening
•

of insulin in the morning and 1/3 in the evening
•
One third of the requirement for a dose is given as plain insulin and 2/
3 of the remaining for that dose as intermediate acting insulin
•
On basal- bolus regimen, night time intermediate acting insulin may
represent 30-50% of total daily insulin, 50-70% as rapid insulin divided
to 3 or 4 pre-meal boluses.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
45
Complications of Diabetes
mellitus – Acute
Chapter 8

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
46
Complications of Diabetes
mellitus – Acute
 Dr. B.R. Giri  MD.
Diabetes are prone to many acute complications, some of which are life
threatening. These are medical emergencies and if these are not managed
appropriately, it can result in mortality.
8.1.
Severe life threatening complications or emergencies
•
Hypoglycemic coma
•
Diabetic Ketoacidosis with or without coma
•
Hyperosmolar nonketotic coma
•
Lactic acidosis
8.2
Mild complications
Mild complications are varied and are not so uncommon. These too require
appropriate management as these can progress to more severe problems.
•
Insulin oedema
•
Blurred vision (presbiopia)
•
Insulin allergy
•
Acute neuropathy
•
Insulin abscess
•
Diabetic skin infections
•
Diabetic genital infections.
8.3.
Other Medical and surgical emergencies occurring in a
diabetic
Diabetics are more prone to developing these complications. These are life
threatening complications.
•

threatening complications.
•
Acute Myocardial Infarction
•
Cerebrovascular accident
•
Acute abdomen
•
Diarrhoea and vomiting
•
Trauma
•
All other medical and surgical conditions as in non diabetic

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
47
8.4.
Hypoglycaemic coma
Hypoglycaemic coma is the commonest emergency in a diabetic individual.
The most common causes of hypoglycaemia are excess dosing of insulin or oral
hypoglycaemic drugs, decreased carbohydrate intake and sudden increase in
physical activity. Patients with hepatocellular disease and renal failure may also
present in hypoglycaemia.
8.4.1 Symptoms and signs of hypoglycaemia
Adrenergic
•
Headache, palpitation
•
Confusion, Paraesthesia
•
Hypothermia, Paralysis
•
Seizures, Coma
Neuroglycopenic
•
Sweating, Trembling,
•
Looking pale
•
Weakness, Hunger
•
Lack of concentration
•
Irritability/aggressive behavior
8.4.2. Stages of hypoglycemia
•
Mild : No assistance required for recognition or treatment
•
Moderate : Some assistance required for recognition and/or treatment
•
Severe: Unable to recognise or treat
Treat all hypoglycemia immediately
8.4.3. Treating hypoglycemia

Treat all hypoglycemia immediately
8.4.3. Treating hypoglycemia
If hypoglycaemia is noticed, treat the patient immediately. Mild to moderate
hypoglycaemia can be managed at the place of work or at home. However, if
severe hypoglycaemia is suspected, move the patient to the nearest health facility
for institution of its management immediately.
8.4.3.1. Mild Hypoglycemia
•
Check blood glucose level if possible
•
Give 15 grams of quickly absorbed carbohydrate to eat like glucose
powder, sugar, fruit juice etc.
•
Also give another 15 grams of slow acting carbohydrate to eat
•
Check blood glucose level after 10 minutes
•
Treat again if blood glucose level is <72 mg/dl or signs and symptoms
of hypoglycaemia persist.
•
Identify cause of hypoglycaemia and remove the cause.
•
Is there a further risk of hypoglycaemia? If it is there, advice against
it.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
48
8.4.3.2. Moderate hypoglycemia
•
Ensure safety, do not leave the individual  alone
•
Check blood glucose level if possible
•
Give 15 grams of quickly absorbed carbohydrate like sugar, glucose
powder, and fruit juice.
•
Give another 15 grams of slowly absorbed carbohydrate like rice,
biscuits etc.
•
Check blood glucose level after 10 minutes
•
Treat again if blood  glucose level is <72 mg/dl  or signs and  symptoms
persist
•
Identify cause of hypoglycemia and correct cause
•
Look for further risk of hypoglycaemia. If it is present, advise on its
correction.
8.4.3.3. Severe Hypoglycaemia
Severe hypoglycemia can be life threatening. Energetic and prompt management
must be instituted to prevent permanent brain damage.
•
Check blood glucose level  if possible
•
Place the patient on side and clear airway
•
Give glucagon if available
•
Phone ambulance or medical officer. Patient may need IV glucose if

•
Give glucagon if available
•
Phone ambulance or medical officer. Patient may need IV glucose if
he/she is drowsy, confused, has seizures or is unconscious
•
Treat as mild hypoglycaemia when consciousness is regained
•
Give at least 45 grams of slowly absorbed carbohydrade if glucagon
has been used
Preventing Hypoglycemia
Hypoglycaemia can easily be prevented if the following measures are followed
by individuals who take insulin or oral hypoglycemic agents.
•
Always carry quickly absorbed carbohydrate
•
Take injections, tablets, meals and snacks as recommended
•
Plan for unusual exercise
•
Do not drink alcohol without food
•
Monitor blood glucose levels
•
Know how to recognise and treat hypoglycaemia
•
At the slightest symptom of hypoglycaemia, the individual must take
easily absorbed carbohydrate immediately.
8.5.  Diabetic ketoacidosis
Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) is a medical emergency that is caused by inadequate

Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) is a medical emergency that is caused by inadequate
insulin action which results in hyperglycemia, osmotic diuresis, lipolysis,

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
49
ketonaemia, and water and electrolyte losses.  These metabolic changes lead to
drowsiness and confusion, stupor, shock, coma or death, unless they are treated
urgently.  Mortality rates due to severe DKA and coma still remain high, varying
from 5-10% in specialized centers and up to 25% in other hospitals.
8.5.1. Precipitating factors
Diabetic ketoacidosis is precipitated in persons taking insulin or other
hypoglycaemic agents by following conditions.
•
Inadequate insulin or omission of insulin in Type 1Diabetes
•
Diabetes patients having sudden severe stress like
-
Infections
-
Stroke
-
Myocardial infection
-
Trauma.
8.5.2 Clinical presentation
Diabetic ketoacidosis must be suspected in any patient either on insulin or other
hypoglycaemic agents if they develop following manifestations.
•
Exacerbation of thirst, polyuria and weakness.
•
Dry skin, dry mucous membrane, sunken eyeballs due to dehydration
•

•
Dry skin, dry mucous membrane, sunken eyeballs due to dehydration
•
Rapid respiration and air hunger, progressing to Kussmaul breathing
in severe cases.
•
Oliguria which follows initial phase of polyuria.
•
Nausea, vomiting, weakness and malaise.
•
Muscle aches, and severe abdominal pain especially in children.
•
Hypotension and tachycardia with a rapid but weak pulse.
•
Depression of the central nervous system, with headache, drowsiness,
stupor and convulsion, followed by coma.
8.5.3. Diagnosis
Most careful history, clinical examination and simple biochemical investigations
confirm the diagnosis.
8.5.3.1. Biochemical findings
Raised blood sugar levels are always present in DKA. However, blood sugar
level does not correlate with severity of the illness. Diabetic ketoacidosis is
seen even with a blood sugar level of 250 mg%.  Ketone bodies are present in
urine and also in plasma.  Blood ketone levels are often raised by about 100 fold

urine and also in plasma.  Blood ketone levels are often raised by about 100 fold
or more.  Serum bicarbonate levels are low, (usually less than 15mEq/L) and
blood pH is reduced.  Serum protein, haemoglobin and haematocrit levels are
raised due to dehydration.  Leucocytosis is common and does not always indicate
infection.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
50
8.5.4. Principles of management
Following are the principles of management of diabetic ketoacidosis.
•
Correction of dehydration.
•
Maintenance of circulation
•
Correction of acidosis
•
Correction of electrolyte imbalance
•
Correction of hyperglycemia
•
General care of comatose patient
•
Treatment of infection (if present)
It is of crucial importance that the most important causes of death in DKA are
•
Before treatment is initiated
-
Cardiovascular collapse
-
Acidosis
•
After 4- 8 hours of initiation of treatment
-
Cerebral edema due to rapid excess fluid infusion and rapid
lowering of blood sugar
-
Hypokalaemia due to insulin induced influx of potassium into the
cells
8.5.4.1. Fluid Management
Diabetic ketoacidosis have severe degree of dehydration. Rehydration is of first
priority.  This will avoid or correct cardiovascular collapse and prevent early
death. Isotonic saline can be safely used in the following schedule :
o

death. Isotonic saline can be safely used in the following schedule :
o
1 liter in the first half hour,
o
then 1 liter in one hr.+ Kcl 1 amp
o
 then 1 liter in 2 hr, + Kcl 1 amp
o
then 1 liter in 4 hr,
o
 then 1 liter 8 hourly or as clinical state demands.
If serum Na+levels exceed 155 m Eq/L, half normal saline should be infused. If
half normal saline is not available, pass a NG tube and run equal volume of
distilled water maintaining the calculated volume of fluid.  In patients with
cardiovascular disease or in the elderly, fluid replacement should be done with
care, if possible, with central venous pressure monitoring.  Once blood glucose
levels have fallen to 250 mg%, 10% glucose should be infused 500ml every 4
hours.
8.5.4.2. Insulin Management
Insulin can be used either through continuous intravenous route or given
intramuscularly depending upon available facilities, expertise and experience.
Intramuscular insulin

Intramuscular insulin
The patient is given 20 units (10-25 units) soluble insulin initially followed by

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
51
4-6 units hourly until blood glucose falls to 250 mg%, then 6 unit is given IM 2
hourly with 10% glucose (500 ml/4 hrs).
This is continued till the first meal when soluble insulin is given thrice daily
(e.g. 12 units thrice daily) or the patient is put back on his usual pre-admission
insulin regime.
There is no alternative to frequent blood glucose estimation for proper insulin
dosing.
Continuous intravenous infusion of insulin
This is possible only in specialized centers where facilities for continuous insulin
infusion and biochemical monitoring are available.
Bolus insulin is given at a rate of 0.1unit/kg weight followed by the following
hourly regimen either through infusion set or through microdrip set.
Table 8.1:Insulin infusion rate
Spot blood sugar(capillary)
 Intravenous Insulin (Infusion pump)
mg/dl
International Unit (IU)
< 140
Omit
141 to180
1 unit / hour
181 to 220
2 units/hour
221 to 260
3units/hour
>261

< 140
Omit
141 to180
1 unit / hour
181 to 220
2 units/hour
221 to 260
3units/hour
>261
4 units/hour
Blood glucose must be monitored hourly, urine acetone two hourly, ABG and
K+ 8 hourly.   In most cases blood sugar fall by about 90 mg% per hour.  When
blood glucose falls to 250mg%, insulin infusion rate is decreased to 2-3 units/
hour.  In case of children under the age of 10 years 3 units/hour of insulin is
sufficient.
When blood sugar level stabilizes, subcutaneous insulin can be begun as the
patient is able to eat orally. Add hourly insulin requirement of the last six hours
and multiply the sum by four, which is the daily insulin requirement of the
patient.
Give 1/3 of daily requirement as plain insulin and other 2/3 as lente.
Intermediate acting insulin is given in two doses, 2/3 of the total pre-breakfast
and the other 1/3 before dinner.  Plain insulin is divided equally in three doses
and given pre-breakfast, pre-lunch and pre-dinner to counter the post-meal blood
glucose surge.

and given pre-breakfast, pre-lunch and pre-dinner to counter the post-meal blood
glucose surge.
Give the first dose of fixed regimen but continue insulin through insulin pump
for one more hour before finally discontinuing it.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
52
Plain and Lente insulin must be mixed and instituted before breakfast and dinner.
Premixed insulin is used in similar dosage and frequency. Dose adjustment of
insulin is made every three to four days.
8.5.4.3. Management of Electrolytes
Dyselectrolytemia is an important cause of mortality in diabetes ketoacidosis.
Management of electrolyte is another equally important aspect in the management
of diabetic ketoacidosis.
Potassium
Hypokalaemia is a major cause of avoidable mortality in treatment of DKA.
Replacement of potassium should therefore be started from the time of initiation
of insulin therapy.  Add potassium after 2 liters of fluid has been infused and
when diuresis occur.
♦
Serum K+ is 6 mEq/lit: Do not add potassium
♦
Serum K+ 5-6 mEq/lit: add 10 mmol/hr of intravenous potassium
♦
Serum K+ 3-5 mEq/lit: 30mmol/hr.of intravenous potassium
♦
Serum K+ < 3 mEq/lit: 40 mmol/hr. of intravenous potassium

♦
Serum K+ < 3 mEq/lit: 40 mmol/hr. of intravenous potassium
Add 30-40 mEq of K+ to a litre of intravenous fluid but not more than 30m Eq.
per hour and not more than 120 mEq in 24 hours followed by oral potassium for
a week.
Bicarbonate:
Bicarbonate therapy is generally not necessary when low dose insulin regime is
followed.
However, if pH is less than 7.0, then 100mg sodium bicarbonate added with
20mmol potassium should be given in 45 to 60 minutes. Bicarbonate may be
needed in painful hyperventilation.
Supportive  measures and general care
Precipitating factor must be identified and dealt with like antibiotics for infection.
Gastric aspiration must be done to relieve paralytic stomach and prevent
aspiration. All other supportive measures must be instituted simultaneously.
8.6. Hyperosmolar non ketotic coma (HONK)
There is severe hyperglycemia (blood glucose>600mg %), plasma
hyperosmolality, lack of ketoacidosis and severe dehydration.  It occurs more

hyperosmolality, lack of ketoacidosis and severe dehydration.  It occurs more
commonly in older Type 2 diabetics. This is associated with a high mortality
rate of 20 to 70%.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
53
8.6.1. Clinical features
Long period of polyuria, polydipsia, vomiting and stopping of food and fluid
intake, anorexia, confusion, drowsiness and coma are some features.  There
may be a variety of neurological deficits.
8.6.2. Precipitating factors
•
Majority have underlying chronic illness  of kidneys, liver,
hypertension or stroke
•
Patients may be on drugs that aggravate diabetes like diuretics, steroid
etc.
•
Uncontrolled diabetic state precipitated by infection, burn, myocardial
infarction or stroke.
•
Therapeutic measures in diabetic like peritoneal or haemodialysis,
surgery etc.
8.6.3. Laboratory findings
There is marked hyperglycemia, plasma hyperosmolality in the presence of
minimal or no ketosis and acidosis.  Hypernatraemia is present in 50% of  cases.
Plasma bicarbonate may be moderately decreased due to renal acidosis or
occasionally some lactic acidosis if the patient is in shock.

occasionally some lactic acidosis if the patient is in shock.
Plasma potassium tends to be normal or low, despite large deficit of total body
potassium.
Table 8.2: Differentiating HONK from DKA
DKA
HONK
Blood glucose
>14 mmol/L (252 mg/dl)
>33 mmol/L (594 mg/dl)
Ketones
Urine: mod - large
Urine: neg - small
Blood: > 3 mmol/L
Blood: <0.6 mmol/L
Osmolality
Increased - dehydrated
> 350m Osm/kg
very dehydrated
Electrolytes
Low Na+
High Na+
Low HCO3 (< 15)
 High HCO3 (> 15)
K+ Increased         or
decreased
Anion gap
> 10 mild
> 12 mod-severe
< 12
PH
< 7.30
> 7.30

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
54
8.6.4. Treatment
Hyperosmolar non ketotic coma is a medical emergency with high mortality
rate. This condition must be managed aggressively.
8.6.4.1. Fluid replacement
It is the first priority.  Isotonic (0.9% saline) may be used initially while laboratory
results are awaited.  In hypernatraemic patients with plasma sodium more than
145mEq/L half normal saline should be used.  In other patients normal saline
can be continued.  Rate of administration should be fairly rapid, 2 liters in first
2 hours followed by 1 liter every 2 hours until blood glucose reaches 250mg/dl
when 5% glucose should be used. If half normal saline is not available, pass a
nasogastric tube and feed same amount of plain water as normal saline keeping
the ultimate fluid requirement to a balance. One can transfuse same volume of
distilled water too.  In elderly patients with cardiovascular disease fluid
replacement should be carefully monitored.

replacement should be carefully monitored.
8.6.4.2. Insulin
The patients are relatively sensitive to insulin, so a dose of soluble insulin half
one would use in DKA, that is, 3 units hourly by continuous intravenous infusion,
or 5 units intramuscularly hourly.  When blood glucose falls to 250mg%, insulin
is given intramuscularly every 4 to 5 hours.
8.6.4.3. Potassium
Potassium replacement is done as in DKA starting once diuresis has commenced,
usually with the second liter of saline.  In general 250 mEq are given in the first
24 hours.  Oral potassium is then given for a week.
8.6.4.4. Other measures
Precipitating factors need recognition and adequate management.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
55
Complications of diabetes – Chronic
Chapter 9

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
56
Complications of diabetes – Chronic
Dr.B.R. Giri  MD.
Diabetes is a multisystem metabolic disorder. Chronic complications begin much
before diabetes is detected. As diabetes result in damage of both large and small
blood vessels, most organ system of body are vulnerable to chronic diabetic
complications. Some patients present with complications for the first time.
9.1 Ocular complications
 Each structure of ocular tissue and adnexa is vulnerable to this chronic disorder.
Commonest involvement of eye is that of retina which can be devastating
resulting ultimately in loss of vision.
•
Diabetic  Retinopathy
•
Diabetic   cataract
♦
Early, Senile
♦
True Diabetic (Snow Flake)
•
Recurrent Iritis
•
Infections
9.1.1. Risk factors of diabetic retinopathy
•
Poor glycaemic control
•
Long duration
•
Hypertension
•
Hypercholesterolaemia
•
Nephropathy
•
Pregnancy
 9.1.2. Classification of diabetic retinopathy
•

•
Hypercholesterolaemia
•
Nephropathy
•
Pregnancy
 9.1.2. Classification of diabetic retinopathy
•
Non-Proliferative diabetic retinopathy
♦
minimal, mild, moderate, severe
•
Proliferative diabetic retinopathy
♦
High-risk PDR, advanced PDR
•
Macular oedema, clinically significant macular oedema
9.1.2.1. Mild to moderate Non Proliferative  Diabetic Retinopathy
There are mild to moderate number of microaneurysms and haemorrhages. Hard
and soft exudates may be present. This requires meticulous control of blood
sugar, micro-photograph of the fundus for future reference and, follow up
examination every 4 to 6 months.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
57
9.1.2.2. Severe Non Proliferative Diabetic Retinopathy
A large number of microaneurysms are seen. However, no new vessel is seen.
Vision is good unless maculopathy supervenes. This requires fluorescein
angiography and photocoagulation.
9.1.2.3. Proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR)
New vessel formation and fibrous tissue proliferation occur in retina, disc and
vitreous. Vitreous hemorrhage and retinal detachment result in severe loss of
vision
9.1.2.3. Diabetic maculopathy
This is characterized by exudates, edema and haemorrhage at the macula. Vision
is reduced severely in advanced stages of the disease. This requires treatment
by photocoagulation.
The latest modality of treatment is vitrectomy and intravitreal triamnicolone
injection.
9.1.3. Other eye complications
9.1.2.3. Refractive error
 This is a common eye complication in diabetes. Diabetics need to undergo
frequent refractive error examination.
9.1.2.3. Lens

frequent refractive error examination.
9.1.2.3. Lens
Risk of cataract formation is 204 times more in diabetics than in non-diabetic
subjects.  The risk of cataract increases by 15 to 20 times after the age of 40.
9.1.2.3. Virtous
 Due to neovascularization in retina, risk of haemorrhage and extension into the
virtuous is high, resulting in uniocular blindness.
Other eye complications are orbito-rhinomucormicosis, xanthelesma, and
decreased tear, paresis of extra ocular muscles, bells palsy, corneal ulcer, raised
intraocular pressure, iritis and deposits of pigment in iris.
 9.1.2.3. Therapy
Good control of blood sugar is of vital importance, to reverse ocular
complications. Patients who have early eye complications require insulin
supplementation.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
58
9.1.4. Important to remember
•
All diabetics must know of sight threatening diabetic eye complications
•
Complete eye evaluation must be done at  initial diagnosis of diabetes
•
Yearly eye evaluation must be done if retinopathy is absent, otherwise
six monthly eye evaluation is necessary
•
Diabetic who is planning for  pregnancy or is already pregnant must
undergo complete eye evaluation every trimester
•
Good glycemic control delays eye complications
•
Timely detection and treatment of diabetes reduce but do not prevent
development of decreased vision.
•
 It is the duration and not severity of diabetes that effect ocular tissues.
•
No treatment modality reverses diabetic complications but halt or delay
the progression.
•
All patients 10-30 years of age with 5 or more years of diabetes or all
diabetics diagnosed after 30 years of age should be evaluated by
ophthalmologist.
9.2.  Diabetic Neuropathy

ophthalmologist.
9.2.  Diabetic Neuropathy
Diabetic neuropathy is a common, disabling chronic complication of diabetes.
Up to 50% of patients with diabetes having the disease for 20 to 25 years have
neuropathy.  The incidence and severity of neuropathy progresses with duration
of diabetes.
Nerve function deteriorates due to pressure, ischaemia or various metabolic
abnormalities.
 The common etiology of neuropathy are as follows:
•
Sorbitol accumulation in nerve cells and sheath
•
Myoinositol depletion
•
Microangiopathy
9.2.1. Classification of diabetic neuropathy
Diabetes results in progressive irreversible nerve damage. Damage to nerve can
be varied. The commoner ones are as follows:
1. Diffuse symmetrical diabetic polyneuropathy
2. Small fiber neuropathy
3. Autonomic neuropathy
Diabetes also results in acute reversible neuropathy. They are as follows:
1. Femoral neuropathy
2. Cranial nerve palsy
3. Truncal and thoracic neuropathy

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
59
9.2.1.1.  Distal Symmetrical Neuropathy
Distal symmetrical neuropathy is the commonest type of neuropathy, present in
40% of diabetics of 25 years duration.
Clinical features are paresthesias, pins and needles sensation of feet and hands,
dull aching or lancinating pain, worse at night, burning sensation of sole,
cutaneous hyperaesthesia, wide based gait, sense of numbness of feet, absent
ankle jerk, impaired sensation to light touch (glove and stocking), vibration and
position where large fiber involvement occur.  In small fiber involvement, dull
aching pain with impaired pain, touch and temperature sensation occur.
9.2.1.2.  Autonomic neuropathy
This is associated with symmetrical sensory neuropathy.  It can be asymptomatic
or cause incapacitating disability. Majority of patients developing autonomic
neuropathy die within five years of developing symptoms.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
60
•
Cardiovascular
o
Postural hypotension:
It occurs when systolic BP falls by 30 mm Hg on change of posture.
It occurs on  standing erect accompanied by weakness, dizziness,
visual impairment and syncope.
o
Painless myocardial infarction
o
 Sudden cardio-respiratory arrest may occur
•
Gastro intestinal
o
Dysphagia occur due to oesophageal atony.
o
Gastroperesis resulting in delayed gastric emptying, nausea,
vomiting and abdominal fullness occur which is relieved by
metochlorpromide 10mg before each meal
o
Nocturnal diarrhea, faecal incontenance
•
Genitourinary
o
Bladder dysfunction due to loss of bladder sensation occur resulting
in unawareness of desire to micturate, absence of nocturia, poor
urinary stream, incomplete urinary emptying, overflow
incontinence.  Urinary stasis predisposes to infection.
o
Impotence occurs in 25 percent of male diabetics.
o
Retrograde ejaculation is a cause of reduced fertility.
o

o
Retrograde ejaculation is a cause of reduced fertility.
o
Reduced vaginal lubrication and dyspareunia
•
Pseudomotor
o
Gustatory sweating:  Profuse sweating occur while eating,
precipitated by cheese and spices.
o
Nocturnal sweating without hypoglycemia also occurs.
•
Respiratory
o
Impaired breathing control
o
Sleep apnea
•
Vasomotor
o
Abnormalities like cold feet, dry feet
o
 Dependent edema .
o
Bulla formation in the extremities

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
61
9.2.1.3.  Hypoglycemic unawareness
There is denervation of sympathetic and parasympathetic nerves as well as
hypothalamic dysfunction. There is impairment of counter regulatory hormones
as well.
Patients with autonomic neuropathy are prone to hypoglycemia without being
aware of it.
9.2.1.2.  Rapidly reversible neuropathy
Newly diagnosed diabetics present with neuropathy which rapidly improve on
glycemic control.
The nerves that are commonly involved in this condition are.
•
Femoral neuropathy
•
Cranial nerve palsy
•
Truncal & thoracic neuropathy
9.2.1.5. Mononeuropathy and Multiple neuropathy
Mono neuropathy
There may be sudden wrist drop, foot drop or paralysis of one of the cranial
nerves viz. 3rd, 4th, 6th or 7th. Third nerve is commonly affected.  However,
almost every peripheral nerve is affected by mononeuropathy, examples being
radial, ulnar, median, etc. There is high degree of spontaneous recovery over

radial, ulnar, median, etc. There is high degree of spontaneous recovery over
several weeks when blood sugar is controlled.
Diabetic amyotrophy
Proximal motor neuropathy result in severe pain and paresthesia in the upper
legs and weakness and muscle wasting of the quadriceps occur.
Radiculopathy
Diabetics may have severe pain along a dermatome. Symptoms simulate herpes
zooster without skin lesion.
Diabetic neuropathic cachexia
It is common in elderly diabetics with marked weight loss, painful peripheral
neuropathy and depression.
9.2.2. Management
Meticulous glycemic control delays neuropathic complications.  Treatment of
chronic diabetic neuropathy is not satisfactory

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
62
9.2.2.1. Drugs
•
Amitriptyline 50-125 mg/day, starting with a low dose which is gradual
increased.
•
Fluphenazine 1 mg three times a day may be given where available.
•
 Imipramine 50 to100 mg a day is an alternative.
•
Desimipramine 75 mg at bed time
•
Carbamazepine 400-1200mg in 2 divided doses
•
Gabapentin 600-1800 mg in 3 divided doses
•
Tramadol 50 mg 2-3 times a day
•
Capsaicin 0.075 mg cream, to be applied locally 4 times a day
9.2.2.2. Local applicants
o
Lignocaine
o
 Maxiletene
o
Capsaicin 0.075mg cream, apply locally 4 times a day is especially
useful in burning feet syndrome
9.2.2.3. Non-pharmacological treatment
•
Difficult to manage
•
Leg exercises to increase venous return prior to stand up
•
To sit for a few minutes before standing from a lying down position
•
Supportive stocking should be applied while lying down and it  must
not be removed  until returning to supine position.
9.3.  Diabetic nephropathy

not be removed  until returning to supine position.
9.3.  Diabetic nephropathy
Diabetic nephropathy is one of the microvascular complications of diabetes,
manifested by proteinuria, progressive rise in blood pressure and fall of GFR.
Prevalence is more in Type 1  than Type 2 diabetes.  It is a common cause of end
stage renal failure.  Diabetic nephropathy is associated with a variety of clinical
syndrome including mild symptomatic proteinuria, nephritic syndrome,
hypertension and progressive renal failure.  Presence of microalbuminuria in a
young diabetic is indicative of impending nephropathy.  Tight control of blood
sugar and use of ACE inhibitor may reverse microalbuminuria.  Control of
hypertension is very important once albuminuria develop to prevent progressive
kidney damage.
9.3.1. Stages of Diabetic nephropathy
Diabetes nephropathy develops over a period of 10 to 20 years. It passes through
several stages. At onset, kidneys are usually large with hyperfiltration.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
63
Stage
Glomerular
Albuminuria
Blood
Time course
filtration
pressure
(Years after
diagnosis)
Renal hyper-
Elevated
Absent
Normal
At diagnosis
function
Microalbuminuria
Within
30-300mg/day
Rising
5-15
(incipient-
normal range
(within or
Nephropathy)
above)
Macroalbuminuria
Decreasing
>300mg/day
Increased
10-15
or persisting
proteinuria
(Nethropathy)
Renal failure
Diminished
Massive
Increased
15-20
9.3.2. Albuminuria
Screening of albuminuria is important in younger diabetics.  It is a nonspecific
test and common in hypertensive, following urinary tract infection, exercise
and in congestive heart failure.
9.3.3 Guidelines for investigation
All patients detected diabetic at the first instant should have their renal function
assessed.  Urinary proteins, blood urea, creatinine and electrolytes should be
checked.  Those who have positive test for protein in routine test should have 24

checked.  Those who have positive test for protein in routine test should have 24
hour urinary protein estimation done. In those who do not test positive for protein
in routine test must undergo test for microalbumin.
9.3.4. Prophylaxis for diabetic nephropathy
•
Primary prophylaxis: Control of glycaemia.
•
Secondary prophylaxis: Control of blood pressure with ACE inhibitors
and ARBs.
•
 Tertiary prophylaxis: Dietary protein restriction.
9.3.5. Management
9.3.5.1. Glycaemic control
Good glycaemic control reduces risk of diabetic nephropathy by 35 to 56 % in
Type 1 diabetes.
Optimum glycaemic control must be done.
Table 9.1: Stages in Diabetes Nephropathy

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
64
9.3.5.2.  Blood pressure control
Blood pressure must be controlled very well.  With the onset of microalbuminuria,
antihypertensives must be started. ACE inhibitors are known to have
renoprotective effect.
Target BP
1. Without microalbuminuria:  130/80 mm Hg.
2. With microalbuminuria :       120/75 mm Hg.
Verapamil or beta blocker also reduce microalbuminuria but less consistently.
ACE inhibitor may be combined with Angiotensin Receptor blocker for
maximum antiproteinuric effect. Thiazide diuretics may be used as first line
antihypertensive.
9.3.5.3.  Diet
Protein intake in excess should be avoided.  It should be imposed early in the
disease. Protein must be restricted to 0.5 to 0.75 mg/kg body weight. Proteins of
high biological value must be encouraged. Fluid overload and hyperkalaemia
must be checked and managed.
9.3.5.4.  Hypoglycemic agents
•
Long acting hypoglycaemic agents and metformin must be stopped
•

9.3.5.4.  Hypoglycemic agents
•
Long acting hypoglycaemic agents and metformin must be stopped
•
Short acting sulphonyluria may be started viz. glipizide, gliclazide
•
Short acting insulin controls sugar well in renal failure
9.3.6. Remember the following
•
On screening albuminuria, if it is present, exclude other causes of
microalbuminuria.
•
Repeat yearly microalbuminurua, if negative.
•
Screening for albuminuria : if positive by dip stick/heat coagulation
test do quantitative estimation of 24 hours urinary albumin excretion
•
Repeat at 3 monthly interval.
•
If negative check for microalbuminuria.
•
Renal function tests such as blood urea, creatinine and electrolytes
must be done simultaneously.
•
Motivate the patient about primary, secondary and tertiary prevention
of diabetic nephropathy.
•
Motivate the patient about glycemic control, blood pressure
normalization, and inform of the precipitating illness aggravating the
condition.
•

normalization, and inform of the precipitating illness aggravating the
condition.
•
Consider ACE inhibitor or ARBs, to slow the rate of progression.
Protein restriction, phosphate lowering agent may have benefit in
selected patients
•
Avoid NSAIDs as they are nephrotoxic.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
65
•
In severe renal failure, patients need renal replacement therapy, either
by hemodialysis or renal transplantation. The later gives the best quality
of life.
9.4. Peripheral Vascular Disease
Atherosclerosis of arteries supplying the legs is the most common form of
peripheral vascular disease.  Atherosclerosis usually affects the large arteries
down to the popleteal artery.  It is a part of generalized atherosclerotic process
which also affects the coronary and extra cranial arteries.  Fifteen years mortality
of a patient at presentation with claudication is 75% and 50% of death is due to
cardiac events and another 15% due to extra cardiac vascular events.
Other causes of chronic limb ischaemia are due to Burger’s disease, popleteal
entrapment, arteritis and vasospastic disease.
Areas of skin necrosis, often over pressure points occur in diabetic foot.  Although

Areas of skin necrosis, often over pressure points occur in diabetic foot.  Although
cause of necrosis is due to proximal atherosclerosis, more commonly there is an
additional element of microvascular diabetic angiopathy affecting the smaller
vessels.
Diabetic sensory neuropathy often allows the lesion to become extensive before
the patient seeks medical help.  Principal difference in management is that
amputation of individual toes or fore foot can often heal successfully if there is
no proximal atherosclerosis.  Such local amputations are inappropriate in non
diabetic patients with pure proximal large vessel diseases. Major cause of death
in patients with peripheral vascular disease is myocardial infarction.  So it is
important to reduce risk factors as far as possible.
9.4.1. Clinical Features
 Progressive narrowing of arteries (supplying legs) produces typical symptoms
of intermittent claudication (i.e. muscle pain on walking a certain distance, which

of intermittent claudication (i.e. muscle pain on walking a certain distance, which
is relieved by a few minutes of rest).  Patients first become aware of symptoms
when walking uphill or climbing stairs.  Some patients may develop rest pain in
affected limb.  This is worse at night and patient may get temporary relief by
allowing limb to hang over the side of bed outside bed clothes.  Calf muscles
are the most commonly affected muscles.
9.4.2. Risk factors for the development of atherosclerosis
Atherosclerosis develops over a period of time. Following are some factors that
predispose an individual to developing atherosclerosis.
•
Smoking
•
Diabetes

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
66
•
Hyperlipidaemia
•
Hypertension.
•
Ageing
•
Male sex
9.4.3. Management
Most patients have mild claudication. It is necessary only to exclude any treatable
underlying disease.
9.4.3.2. General
•
Abstain from smoking
•
Patient should be reassured that intermittent claudication may be
uncomfortable but it is not harmful.
•
Stop vasoconstrictor drugs  e.g. beta blockers
•
Maintain normal blood glucose in diabetic.
•
Regular exercise increases collateral flow.  The importance of regular
exercise should be emphasized, as patient may anticipate pain and
stop exercising before onset of claudication.
This is both psychologically and physiologically undesirable.
•
Foot Care: Patients must examine their foot everyday to look for any
redness, induration, injury, infection or ulcer.
•
Drug therapy: Medication has little role in peripheral vascular disease,
but vasodilators may be useful where there is substantial vasospastic

but vasodilators may be useful where there is substantial vasospastic
component (Nifedipine 5-10 mg tid).  Severe pain especially with
neuropathic component may be helped by amitriptylline (25-50mg).
•
Surgery: Only on severe disability, intractable pain, limb salvage.
9.4.3.2. Surgical options
•
Percutenous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) is the simplest catheter
reopening procedure.
   A guide wire is introduced percutenously into the femoral artery and
    is directed under radiological guidance into the distal femoral arteries.
•
Local fibrinolytic therapy is an alternative or an additional technique
to PTA, particularly if there is a suggestion of recent thrombosis.
Fibrionlytic agents are delivered through a catheter directly into the
occlusion.  A commonly used regimen is streptokinase, 6000 units
per hour with repeat arteriography after 6 – 12 hours of treatment.  If
there is significant improvement, the treatment is continued for 24 –

there is significant improvement, the treatment is continued for 24 –
48 hours with repeat arteriogram every 12 hours.
•
Combination of PTA and Fibrinolytic therapy.
•
Bypass graft
•
Amputation where gangrene has set in and conservative measures
are unsuccessful

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
67
9.5. Diabetic Foot Ulcers
Diabetes mellitus is one of the most debilitating disease that man faces.  Diabetes
is a disease of whole body. Multiple factors including neuropathy, angiopathy,
immunodeficiency, hyperglycemia, nutritional status are in someway or other
responsible for the devastating effects of diabetic foot  infection.
Foot ulcer is the most common cause of hospitalization of diabetics.  Up to 9 –
10 % diabetics develop chronic foot ulcer.  Infection become more severe and
more refractory to treatment in  diabetic then in non-diabetic.  Diabetic
complications including vascular insufficiency, neuropathy and hyperglycemia
contribute to severity of many infections.  This is due to inadequate tissue
perfusion, capillary and lymphatic damage and changes in bactericidal and
chemotactic properties of phagocytes.  Foot infection results in a relatively high

chemotactic properties of phagocytes.  Foot infection results in a relatively high
rate of limb amputation and are associated with a poor long term prognosis for
survival.  They occur in patients who have had diabetes for many years, and
remained hyperglycemic with inadequate treatment.  They also develop other
complications of diabetes mainly ophthalmic, renal and cardiac.
9.5.1.  Predisposing causes of foot ulcer
Three major factors contribute to development of foot ulcer in diabetics.
•
Peripheral arterial disease.
•
Peripheral neuropathy, and
•
Increased susceptibility to infection.
9.5.1.1.  Peripheral Vascular insufficiency
Vascular insufficiency could be due to micro or macro angiopathy.
Approximately 50% of diabetics have evidence of arterial disease 10 to 15 years
after onset of diabetes mellitus.
Microangiopathy which occurs in retina and kidney also occur in toes.  It is
present in 88% of diabetics in comparison to 23% of non-diabetics.  There is

present in 88% of diabetics in comparison to 23% of non-diabetics.  There is
usually intimal thickening and basement membrane thickening which interferes
with diffusion of nutrients.
Edema of lower limb which accompanies cardiac failure, chronic renal failure
and edema due to infection aggravate arterial insufficiency.
Normal foot has rich collateral circulation.  In a diabetic, multiple complete or
partial occlusion of large, medium and small vessels can convert a part of foot
dependent on only one vessel to develop necrosis especially when infection sets
in.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
68
9.5.1.2.  Neuropathy
Neuropathy occur in diabetes of more than 10 to 15 years.  Motor, sensory and
sympathetic nerves are affected causing deformity, insensitive or partially
sensitive foot and dry non sweating feet.  All these cause callus formation leading
to pressure necrosis.  Insensitive feet are prone to injuries in various ways.
Because of poor eye sight, they can injure toes while clipping nail or step on
sharp objects.  Pressure necrosis occur when external pressure exceed capillary
pressure, for example when insensitive feet lie on bed for prolonged time or
when a tight shoe is used.  Autonomic neuropathy cause dry fissured skin that
crack easily, opening up avenue for infection.
9.5.1.3.  Susceptibility to infection
Hyperglycemia causes defective phagocytosis and also facilities growth of
bacteria that enter tissue.
Ketoacidosis delays migration of granulocyte to site of lesion and depress

Ketoacidosis delays migration of granulocyte to site of lesion and depress
bactericidal and phagocytic functions of these cells.  Antibody production to
response of bacterial antigens is also diminished.  Microagiopathy facilitates
infection through decreased tissue perfusion and low oxygen level.  It also impairs
delivery of granulocyte, antibiotics and antibodies to the site of infection.
Infection can be asymptomatic fungal infection to severe limb threatening or
life threatening disorder.  A great majority of patients present late.  The reasons
are due to  patients’ unawareness of  neuropathy and poor vision. At times, lack
of awareness of referring physician of the severity of disease process result in
devastations.  Often primary care physician sees the tip of an iceberg – a small
ulcer and a bid of pus - where as extensive soft tissue destruction, and even
osteomyelities have already occurred.
9.5.2. Management

osteomyelities have already occurred.
9.5.2. Management
A diabetic with aseptic foot needs emergency treatment.  A complete diabetic
work up including culture of pus from wound should be done.  Large doses of
broad spectrum antibiotics should be given till results of culture sensitivity are
available, when it can be changed if necessary.  Blood glucose should be
controlled with regular insulin, and should be monitored frequently.  Usually 6-
12 hours of treatment is necessary to prepare the patient for surgery.
Surgery is indicated in all patients except those with superficial ulcers, which
can be managed conservatively, or superficial cellulites that respond to rest and
antibiotics.
The need for prompt surgical drainage, debribement, or amputation when such
procedure is indicated, should be stressed.  Unfortunately needless delay on the
part of the patient or physicians often occur which result in spreading infection,

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
69
vascular thrombosis and proximal extension of the destructive process
threatening patient’s limb and even life.
When blood supply is adequate aggressive debribement of all necrotic tissue
should be performed, without regard to subsequent reconstruction.  Usually
diabetic foot infections are deceptive of amount of devitalized tissue and are
invariably more extensive than that is suggested by initial clinical examination.
De-roofing of all cavities and careful handling of adjacent healthy tissue is a
must.  Rough handling of tissue can cause necrosis of wound margin.  Use of all
types of tissue irritant and detergent should be avoided.  Normal saline should
be preferred during dressing and debribement.
When severe sepsis is present and foot salvage does seem to be impossible, an
early decision in favour of amputation can save life.
After debridement of a diabetic foot, wound must be reassessed on a daily basis.

After debridement of a diabetic foot, wound must be reassessed on a daily basis.
If pus is found on the dressing, an inadequately drained pocket should be
suspected.
Steps in diabetes foot ulcer management
•
Control of diabetes with insulin
•
Control of infection with antibiotic
•
Pressure elimination
•
Anti-tetanus measures should be given
•
Adequate nutrition
•
Look for kidney and cardiac status
•
Wound care, debribement and dressing
•
 Some form of anesthesia is required during manipulation of wound
except in insensitive foot
•
Diabetic foot will tolerate extensive incision
•
Wide surgical incision and drainage of deep infection is almost always
necessary and should be considered
•
Diabetic foot is often deceptive.  Patient may have minimum or no
pain.  Typical signs of infection may be absent in early stage.  Extent
of deep tissue necrosis is often greater than that of clinical external
appearance
•
Excision of all dead tissue is a must
•

appearance
•
Excision of all dead tissue is a must
•
Daily careful wound examination and debribement should be done.
•
No corrosive or detergent should be used in the wound.  Diluted H2O2
and diluted iodine (non irritant) can be used in gross infection;
otherwise normal saline wash is the best with normal saline socked
gauze dressing, which can be changed 2 to 3 times daily.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
70
9.5.3. Some practical tips
•
History of diabetes treatment, glycemic control, self care and other
diabetes related complication must be taken.
Look for:
♦Full thickness ulcer
♦Deep ulcer
♦Ulcer to bone and osteomyelites
♦Wet or dry gangrene
♦In extensive gangrene, foot salvage is not possible
Signs of vascular insufficiency:
♦Diminished or absent pulse
♦Loss of hair in the fore foot toes
♦Cornification of nails
♦Atrophic skin and subcutaneous tissue
♦Decreased skin temperature
♦Marked pallor on elevation
♦Venous filling time > 20 sec
♦Capillary filling time of finger tip > 3 sec
•
All diabetics should examine their lower extremities for redness,
wound, infection etc.
•
Periodic examination of  vascularity and neuropathy of lower limbs
must be done.
♦Palpate dorsalis pedis, posterior tibialis, popliteal and femoral
arteries of both lower extremities at every visit.
♦Inspect skin color, temperature, skin texture.

arteries of both lower extremities at every visit.
♦Inspect skin color, temperature, skin texture.
♦Identify any ulcer, blister thoroughly.
•
Complications should be explained in easy language.  Daily self foot
examination should be taught.
•
Avoid extreme temperature.
•
Foot ware should be oversize.  High heel shoes should be avoided by
ladies.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
71
Elderly and Diabetes
Chapter 10

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
72
Elderly and Diabetes
 Dr.B.R. Giri  MD.
Glucose tolerance deteriorates with age.  Diabetes mellitus and its complications
are important health problems in elderly.  It is an increasing problem with average
life expectancy on a rise.  Post prandial blood sugar rises by 10 mg % per decade
after 50 years of age.  Macrovascular disease is higher in elderly diabetes.  Most
elderly diabetes is Type 2.  Pathogenesis of elderly diabetes is same as for other
patients. Other age related factors like sedentary life style, increased adiposity,
coexistent medical conditions, and concomitant use of multiple glucose intolerant
drugs also contribute to the development of hyperglycemia.
10.1. Insulin Secretion
Glucose stimulated insulin secretion is blunted with increasing age.  There is
reduced sensitivity of B-cells to glucose stimuli.
10.2. Insulin Resistance
Primary cause of deterioration in glucose in advancing age is tissue

10.2. Insulin Resistance
Primary cause of deterioration in glucose in advancing age is tissue
unresponsiveness to insulin.
Reduced physical activity, excess calorie and carbohydrate intake may
secondarily induce and aggravate insulin resistance.
10.3. Clinical Features
Classical symptoms of polydipsia, polyphagia, polyuria are less common in
elderly.  Non-specific symptoms like fatigue, pruritus vulvae, incontinence,
weight loss may be some features at presentation.  Many patients may be detected
on pre-operative screening.  Some patients present with cataract, IHD or
hypertension.
10.4. Chronic complications
10.4.1. Microangiopathy
10.4.1.1. Retinopathy
Diabetic retinopathy in general and maculopathy in particular are typically
important problems of elderly diabetics.  Prevalence of retinopathy (as of
diabetes) rises with age.  Maculopathy accounts for the majority of cases with
visual loss.  Photocoagulation is very effective in preservation of sight in this
condition.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
73
10.4.1.2. Maculopathy
It is identified by the presence of hard exudates, visual acuity less than 6/9 or a
ring of hard exudates with a centrally visible vascular anomaly lying within one
disc diameter of the fovea.  Cataract, macular degeneration and glaucoma are
common in elderly diabetic population.
10.4.1.3. Neuropathy
Absent ankle jerk and reduced vibration sense are common in non-diabetic
elderly.  Diabetic proximal motor neuropathy (Diabetic Amyotrophy) is common
in elderly.  There is asymmetric weakness of pelvic girdle and thigh muscles,
with little sensory changes.  It may be associated with excruciating pain over
the limbs and marked loss of weight.  Active physiotherapy and good glycaemic
control ameliorates the problem in about 6 to 12 months.  Autonomic neuropathy
is equally common and may present as postural hypotension, hypoglycemic
unawareness, gastric and urogenital abnormalities and impotence.

unawareness, gastric and urogenital abnormalities and impotence.
10.4.1.3. Diabetic Foot
Elderly diabetics are unable to see their feet because of poor eyesight, unable to
feel them because of sensory loss and unable to bend down to touch them because
of arthritis.  About 20% of the diabetic admissions are for diabetic foot problems.
Education aimed at preventive foot care could dramatically reduce amputation
rate.  Visually handicapped elderly diabetics with peripheral and autonomic
neuropathy and peripheral atherosclerotic vascular disease are highly prone to
diabetic foot symptom.  Recurrent foot ulcers are common.
10.4.2. Macroangiopathy
Mortality due to cardiovascular complications is increased in elderly diabetics
and in those with impaired glucose tolerance.  Combination of aging with diabetes
exposes these subjects to increased risk of atherosclerosis.  Many aged may
present with macrovascular changes.  Older individuals are prone to hypertension

present with macrovascular changes.  Older individuals are prone to hypertension
and dyslipidaemia and thus the stage is set for the cardiac, cerebral and peripheral
vascular disease.  Obesity, sedentary life style and smoking may also contribute
to morbidity.
10.4.3.  Management
Exercise, diet, oral hypoglycemic agents and insulin are the modalities of therapy
in elderly diabetics.
Emphasis on diet therapy is total caloric restriction.  Total caloric restriction
can be effectively emphasized by saying, “eat half of what you used to” in

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
74
obese diabetics.  Individual food faddists must be respected and altered a little.
Due concessions must be given for coexistent oral problems due to loss of teeth
and taste.  Second generation sulphonyluria (Glibenclamide) exhibit fewer drug
interactions due to their non-ionic binding and their hypoglycemic potential.
Biguanides especially Metformin is a safe alternative for overweight diabetics.
Renal impairment and cardiac failure are common in old age and caution is
needed before prescribing biguanides as these predispose to lactic acidosis.
Persistent symptoms, ketonuria or continual weight loss while on maximum
safe dose of oral agents are indications to introduce insulin.  Rarely may they
require complex split and mixed regime of insulin but majority of insulin
requiring diabetics need to be given a single daily dose of intermediate acting
insulin in the morning.  If fasting hyperglycemia persists on this regime, some

insulin in the morning.  If fasting hyperglycemia persists on this regime, some
may require small quantities of intermediate acting insulin in the evening.
Compliance with insulin regimens is usually good among the elderly.
10.4.4. Monitoring Control
Urine glucose testing is unreliable because of raised renal threshold for glucose
in the elderly.
Hence, blood glucose monitoring at health facilities is the best way of monitoring
diabetes control.
Home monitoring of blood glucose is encouraged. Periodic examination of
HbA1C gives the degree of blood sugar control over a period of 2 to 3 months.
10.5.  Conclusion
Hyperglycemia in elderly is an important health care problem. About 10% of
persons > 60 years of age have diabetes and this will increase by another 10%
for every decade. Mild degree of glucose intolerance for prolonged period has
increased morbidity.
Elderly are vulnerable to various disease conditions. Diabetes and its

increased morbidity.
Elderly are vulnerable to various disease conditions. Diabetes and its
complications add up to the already disease burdened population. Hence it is
crucial to look for occurrence of diabetes and follow measures to delay its
occurrence and prevent their complications.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
75
Diabetes Mellitus and Surgery
Chapter 11

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
76
Diabetes Mellitus and Surgery
 Dr. B.R. Giri  MD.
With advancement in the management of all types of diabetes, life expectancy
of diabetic has increased significantly.  Patients with Type 2 Diabetes are
nowadays expected to have near normal longevity.  This increased life
expectancy together with modern advances in medical and surgical therapies
mean that a diabetic individual has an even greater chance of requiring surgery
during life time.  Thus health care team needs to be aware of metabolic problems
that may arise during surgery.  The elevation of counter regulatory hormones,
associated suppression of insulin secretion, excessive lipolysis and ketogenesis
that can all occur during surgery can have particularly deleterious effects on
patient with diabetes.  In addition complication of diabetes such as micro and
macroangiopathy, nephropathy, neuropathy etc. may enhance morbidity and
mortality of anesthesia in surgery.

mortality of anesthesia in surgery.
If proper attention is not paid to keeping the plasma glucose level within an
acceptable range in the preoperative period:
•
The patient, especially with Type 1 Diabetes, may go into ketosis and
acidemia and/or
•
May be susceptible to electrolyte abnormalities and volume depletion
from osmotic diuresis.
There is data indicating impaired wound strength and wound healing with high
plasma glucose levels. Leukocyte functions of chemotaxis, opsonisation and
phagocytosis are also affected by hyperglycemia.
11.1. Aims of Therapy
Unrecognized hypoglycemia in anesthetized patients may have serious
consequences. So, a very “tight” intra-operative control of glucose level is
unwise.  During the peri-operative period not only should the chances of
developing hypoglycemia be reduced, but also a simultaneous effort should be
made to avoid hyperglycemia, undue protein catabolism and electrolyte
disturbances.

made to avoid hyperglycemia, undue protein catabolism and electrolyte
disturbances.
Attention must also be paid to optimize cardiovascular status, reducing  risk of
infection, improving wound healing and circumventing problems due to long
term complications of diabetes.
Modern inhalation anesthetics have relatively little effect on metabolism
compared to the stress of surgery.  Stabilized glycaemic state, full cardiovascular
assessment including ECG, Serum creatinine and electrolytes measurement,

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
77
urine culture, the elimination of other sources of infection i.e. skin, dental etc.
and careful examination for neuropathy are prerequisites for all elective surgery
in diabetic.
In elective surgical procedure satisfactory preoperative glycaemic control (two
hours after breakfast blood glucose level less then 199mg%) should be achieved
either using short acting sulphonylurias or soluble insulin depending on  type of
patient and type of surgery to be done.  The use of Biguanides or long acting
sulphonylurias is not recommended since the first can induce lactic acidosis
and the second can cause delayed hypoglycemia.
11.2. Preoperative Management
11.2.1. Type 1 Diabetes
All Type 1 diabetes patients need insulin during pre, per and post operative
period.  The glucose values achieved will depend on targets set.  Best
recommended goal ranges between from 78-178mg%.

recommended goal ranges between from 78-178mg%.
Blood sugar monitoring is done every 2-4 hour by glucose strip and insulin
dosage adjusted accordingly.
The addition of potassium to insulin is reported to prevent major excursions in
the plasma potassium level.  It can be concluded that for Type 1 diabetes patients
undergoing major surgery GIK (glucose/insulin/potassium) regimen or a simple
variant there of is the treatment of choice to obtain safe and reasonable glycaemic
control during surgery.
11.2.2. Type 2 Diabetes
Patients requiring minor surgery with reasonable glycaemic control do not require
insulin.  It should be emphasized however, that nearly all protocol depend on
rapid blood glucose estimation.  Most centers now use glucose oxidase dry test
strip technology for this purpose.
11.2.2. Emergency surgery
In case of emergency surgery, metabolic status of patient should be rapidly
assessed as ketoacidosis may coexist and glycaemic control is likely to be poor.

assessed as ketoacidosis may coexist and glycaemic control is likely to be poor.
Standard therapy for DKA should be started and surgery should be delayed for
2-3 hours until there is a metabolic improvement.  GIK should be used pre-
operatively in all cases, taking into account the increased insulin requirement in
sepsis.
In Type 2 diabetes, GIK is continued until first food is eaten, at which time their

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
78
usual therapy can be reinstituted, keeping in mind that patient might need
increased doses to counteract catabolic effect of surgery.  If post operative period
is complicated by infection or any other problem there will certainly be an extra
demand for insulin.
11.2.2.  Suggested protocol
a) Unrecognized hypoglycemia in an anesthetized patient may have
serous consequences and very “tight” intraoperative control of glucose
level is unwise.
b) The only satisfactory way of keeping an eye on the blood glucose
level is by repeated estimation.  This can be done using glucose oxidase
dry strip.
c) In all patients requiring elective surgery, pre-operative glycaemic
control should be reasonable i.e. 2 hours after breakfast blood glucose
level should not be more than 199 mg%.
d) A thorough preoperative check is essential to exclude cardiovascular,
renal and neurological problems.

renal and neurological problems.
e) Because of risk of inducing lactic acidosis, biguanides are not used
preoperatively.  Similarly use of the long acting sulphonylurias such
as Glibenclamide preoperatively is also not recommended for fear of
inducing hypoglycemia.  Gliclazide or Glipizide are the preferred oral
hypoglycemic agent for preoperative blood glucose control wherever
available.
f)
If preoperative blood glucose is not controlled with maximum
recommended dose of oral hypoglycemic agent, then blood glucose
should be controlled preoperatively using a short acting insulin.
g) Diabetic patients, unless there is a pressing reason, should be put first
on the operation theatre list to minimize the effect of prolonged fasting
and dehydration.
h) If possible, choice of anesthesia is either local or regional (such as
spinal),this is not because general anesthesia is more stressful but
because with local and regional anesthesia, it is possible to resume

because with local and regional anesthesia, it is possible to resume
oral feeding quickly and also allows one to resume usual antidiabetic
therapy as quickly as possible.
i)
If insulin is required, it is mainly as a glucose/insulin/potassium (GIK)
infusion.  This regime is some what inflexible i.e. it is not possible to
quickly alter the insulin dosages without also altering the rate of glucose
infusion.  However, it is safe and it does not put the patient at risk of
developing hypoglycemia.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
79
11.2.3. Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus and IRDM (Insulin
Requiring Diabetes Mellitus  During Elective Surgery).
These patients are usually admitted 48-72 hours preoperatively to make sure
that they have satisfactory glycaemic control and to carry out preoperative
investigations.  If control is not satisfactory, operation is delayed until satisfactory
control has been achieved.  The use of long acting insulin is not encouraged
preoperatively and all patients are converted to either intermediate acting or
short acting insulin.  Subsequent management on the day of the operation is as
follow.
1. The patient fasts for about eight hours preoperatively and does not
receive his morning dose of insulin.
2. Dry strip glucose estimate is carried out and if it is more than 200mg%
then the operation is postponed.
3. It is advisable to also estimate the serum potassium level.

then the operation is postponed.
3. It is advisable to also estimate the serum potassium level.
4. A GIK infusion is started at least an hour prior to the operation.  If the
K+ is known to be about or 5mmo1/1 or more, then K+ is omitted
from the infusion regime.
5. Post-operatively blood glucose estimation is carried out 2-6 hourly,
and insulin dose is adjusted accordingly.  K+ estimation, if possible,
should be carried out 6 hourly and infusion rate adjusted accordingly.
The GIK regimen is continued until the consumption of the first meal
after which subcutaneous insulin could be restarted, keeping in mind
that stress effect of surgery might continue in the post operative period
which may increase insulin requirement.
6. For minor operations this protocol is modified.  Morning dose of insulin
is omitted.
Immediate preoperative blood glucose is checked and if it is below
199mg%, the operation is carried out without any insulin cover.  As

199mg%, the operation is carried out without any insulin cover.  As
soon as possible after operation, breakfast along with the patients’
usual insulin is given.  If blood glucose is found to be above199mg%,
or if the operation takes an unexpectedly long time the patient is given
GIK regime and normal diet and insulin is started as soon as possible
after the operation is over.
11.2.4. Initial set up of the GIK regime
To a bag of 500 ml of 5% dextrose solution 1gm of KCL solution is added.
Short acting insulin is then added to this bag according to patients’ blood glucose
level using the following rough guide.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
80
Blood glucose
Insulin
<108mg%
No insulin
104-162%
6 unit
163-198mg%
8 unit
199-234%
10 unit
235-306%
12 unit
This mixture is then given intravenously at a rate of 100ml/hr.  The volume
infused is taken into account with the total volume of fluid infused and extra
fluid is given as per requirement of the situation.
Blood glucose is checked 2 hours later and dose of insulin is adjusted accordingly
using the above guide.  If at any point blood glucose exceeds 306mg% then
subcutaneous soluble insulin is added on top of the IV insulin.  Four units of
insulin is given subcutaneously if the blood glucose level is between 306-378mg/
and 8 units subcutaneously if the blood glucose is between 379-450mg%.
Potassium level is checked every 6-8 hours and if it goes above 5mmo1/1, KCL
is omitted from the next bag.  If on the other hand it falls below 3 mmol/l an

is omitted from the next bag.  If on the other hand it falls below 3 mmol/l an
extra 1 gm of KCL is added to the next bag.  If there are no facilities for checking
serum potassium level, 1gm of KCL is added to alternate bag of 500 ml. of 5%
dextrose solution.
Infusion regime outlined above is recommended in well controlled,
uncomplicated diabetic patients.
For insulin resistant cases, dose of insulin needs to be increased. Insulin dosage
is calculated following the rule of thumb mentioned below.
Obesity – 0.3 – 0.4 units per 1gm of glucose infusion + 7.5 - 10 units.
Liver disease – 0.5 – 0. unit per 1gm of glucose infusion + 12.5 - 15 units.
Severe infection – 0.5 – 0.8 units per 1 gm of glucose infusion + 12.5 - 20 units.
Steroid therapy – 0.5 – 0.6 units per 1gm of glucose infusion + 125 - 25 units.
500ml of 5% dextrose contain 25m glucose
500ml of 10% dextrose contain 50g glucose
500ml of 50% dextrose contain 250g glucose.
Table 11.1 : GIK Set up

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
81
11.2.4. Type 2 Diabetes
11.2.4.1. Diet Control
If glycemic control is satisfactory, these patients are treated almost as though
they are nondiabetic for the purpose of perioperative management.  However,
repeated blood glucose estimation should be carried out.  If, during perioperative
period glycaemic control gets out of hand GIK regime should be instituted
promptly to gain satisfactory control.
11.2.4.2.  Minor Operation
On the morning of operation, oral hypoglycemic agents are omitted and blood
glucose is estimated.  If blood glucose is satisfactory, operation is carried out
and as soon as possible after operation, the patient is given food and first dose
of oral hypoglycemic agent.
11.2.4.3.  Major Operations
In the morning of operation, oral hypoglycemic agent is omitted and blood
glucose level is estimated.  If blood glucose level is satisfactory, GIK regime is

glucose level is estimated.  If blood glucose level is satisfactory, GIK regime is
started and operation is carried out under cover of GIK regime which is continued
to immediate post operative period.  When the patient is well enough to take
orally, s/he is given SC insulin twice or three times daily, usually for a few days.
Once insulin requirement of patient has come down to a reasonable level s/he is
switched to oral hypoglycemic agent using the rule of thumb that 20 units of
insulin is equivalent to 5mg of the Glibenclamide.
11.2.4.4. Emergency surgery
The operation is postponed until patient has been assessed inclusive of blood
biochemistry, ketone bodies and glucose level.  If there is derangement of any
of these parameters, appropriate corrections are made by using GIK regime
supplemented by other steps.  Correction of ketoacidosis, dehydration,
hyperkalemia etc. is more important than the actual blood glucose level prior to

hyperkalemia etc. is more important than the actual blood glucose level prior to
surgery.  Once these have been corrected the patient can be safely subjected to
surgery under cover of GIK regime which is of course continued in the post
operative period.
11.3. Conclusion
Thorough assessment in the preoperative period is as important as per and post
operative management of a diabetic patient.  There is no justification in carrying
out an elective operation on a patient with poor glycaemic control.  A few days
of postponement to achieve satisfactory glycemic control will be richly rewarded
by a smooth post operative period.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
82
Hypertension in Diabetes Mellitus
Chapter 12

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
83
Hypertension in Diabetes Mellitus
Dr. B.R. Giri  MD.
12.1 Introduction
Hypertension is a common problem in diabetic patients.  The prevalence of
hypertension in diabetic population is 1.5 to 3 times that in non-diabetic
population.  It is estimated that 30-75% of diabetic complication can be attributed
to hypertension which is twice as common in diabetic as non-diabetic population.
However, secondary causes of hypertension should also be excluded. Type 2
diabetes patients often have hypertension at presentation.  Type 2 patients with
hypertension frequently share risk factors like obesity, visceral adiposity and
insulin resistance.  Isolated systolic hypertension is common in Type 2 diabetes.
The co-existence of diabetes and hypertension result in multiplication of
macrovascular and microvascular complications. Macrovascular
complications are responsible for majority of deaths in diabetes.

complications are responsible for majority of deaths in diabetes.
Classification  and Management of Hypertension (JNC7)
Table 12.1 : Blood pressure of adults > 18 years of age
BP
SBP
DBP Life style
Initial Drug therapy
Classification
mm
mm Modification
Hg
Hg
Without compelling
With compelling
indication
indication(Table 2)
Normal
<120
<80
Encourage
Prehypertension
120
80 -
Encourage
Antihypertensive not
Drugs for
to
90
indicated
compelling*
139
indications
Stage 1
140-
90-
Hypertension
159
99
Encourage
Thiazides, may
Drugs for
consider,ACE1,ARB, compelling
BB,CCB, a
indications. Other
combination
antihypertensive,
Stage 2
>160
>100 Encourage
diuretics,
Hypertension
ACE1,ARB,BB,
CCB,etc. as
needed
JNC: Joint National Committee
*  : BP goal in diabetes and chronic kidney disease <130/80 mm Hg
ACE1: Angiotensin 1 Inhibitor
ARB: Angiotensin Receptor Blocker

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
84
BB:  Beta Blocker
CCB: Calcium Channel Blocker
Table 12.2 : Guidelines for compelling indications for individual drug
classes
Compelling
Recommended Drugs
indications
Diuretic
 Beta
ACE1
Angiotensin Calcium   Aldosterone
                 Antagonist
Heart Failure
*
*
*
*
*
Post Myocardial
Infarction
*
*
*
High coronary
Disease risk
*
*
*
*
Diabetes
*
*
*
*
*
*
Chronic Kidney
*
*
Disease
Recurrent stroke
*
*
prevention
Compelling indications for antihypertensive drugs are based on benefits from
outcome studies and existing clinical guidelines
The higher reading (systolic and diastolic) should be selected to classify an
individual’s blood pressure status.  Goal of therapy in diabetic hypertensive
patients is to prevent death and disability with least disturbance in quality of
life.
It is recommended that blood pressure for non pregnant diabetic patient is reduced
and maintained at BP<130mm Hg systolic and <85mmHg diastolic. Blood

and maintained at BP<130mm Hg systolic and <85mmHg diastolic. Blood
pressure should be lowered even further  if it  is well tolerated.
12.2. Diagnosis of Hypertension
•
With systolic BP >210 mmHg or diastolic BP >120 mmHG the
diagnosis of hypertension can be made at first visit.
•
In absence of very high BP, multiple readings on three occasions should
be taken. Patients should rest for 5 minutes before BP is taken.  Sitting
BP usually is adequate.  Arm should be at heart level.
•
For patients who are over the age 65, diabetic or receiving
Channel
Blocker
Receptor
Blocker
Inhibitor
Blocker

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
85
antihypertensive drug, postural change by taking readings immediately
and 2 minutes after patient sits or stands should be taken.
•
No caffeine or smoking before recording BP is allowed.
•
Cuff size should be adequate; the blood pressure cuff should encircle
and cover 2/3rd of circumference of arm.  If bladder is small, false
reading will be obtained.
•
Initially, readings in both arms should be taken and if BP differs the
higher reading should be recorded.
•
Korotkoff phase V (disappearance of sound) is taken as diastolic blood
pressure in adults whereas in children, phase IV (muffling) is
considered.
•
If Korotkoff sounds are weak, have the patient rise arm, open and
close hand 5 to 10 times after which bladder is inflated quickly.
•
Aneroid BP instrument should be calibrated every 6 month against a
mercury BP machine.
12.3 Management of Hypertension in Diabetes
12.3.1 Treatment goal

mercury BP machine.
12.3 Management of Hypertension in Diabetes
12.3.1 Treatment goal
Several trials on hypertension has shown direct relationship between systolic
and diastolic blood pressure independently and cardiovascular events and
mortality. Target blood pressure is defined as below 130/80 mm Hg in patients
with hypertension and diabetes, or renal disorders.
The goal of treating high BP is to prevent death and disability without causing
disturbance to quality of life. Treating SBP and DBP below 140/90 mm Hg is
associated with decreased cardiovascular diseases and its complications.
Treatment is non-pharmacological and pharmacological.
12.3.1.1. Non-pharmacological treatment of hypertension
Lifestyle modifications
Life style modification is the fundamental requirement for management of
diabetic hypertensive subjects.  Pharmacological treatment for control of
hypertension should be adhered for lifetime.  Such patients should be educated

hypertension should be adhered for lifetime.  Such patients should be educated
at every available opportunity.  Non pharmacological therapy alone is continued
upto 3 months in prehypertension and stage1 hypertension, which generally
controls high blood pressure.
Physical activity
Obesity is highly prevalent in Type 2 diabetes.  Patients with diabetes and
hypertension should do moderate aerobic exercise (isotonic) 60 minutes each

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
86
time, 7 days in a week.  Exercise improves glycemic control (by improving
insulin sensitivity) reduce and maintain body weight, improve physical capacity,
improve lipid profile by decreasing plasma triglyceride, VLDL and LDL
cholesterol level and increasing HDL cholesterol.  Studies have shown that blood
pressure falls invariably after 4 weeks of regular exercise for 30-45 minutes 3
to 4 times in a week.
Food
Low fat and high carbohydrate diet generally reduce risk of coronary heart disease
but high carbohydrate diet can increase blood glucose level.  Therefore, high
carbohydrate may be avoided. Monosaturated fat is preferred to polysaturated.
Vegetarians have lower blood pressure than non vegetarians, which probably is
due to content of vegetable.  High fibre diet also reduces postprandial rise of
glucose. Consume diet rich in fruit, high in vegetable and low fat diary products.
Minerals

glucose. Consume diet rich in fruit, high in vegetable and low fat diary products.
Minerals
Sodium retention is responsible for causation of hypertension.  Most Type 2
diabetes patients with hypertension are sodium sensitive.  Sodium restriction
clearly reduces blood pressure. Hence, a sodium intake of less than 2.3g sodium
or 5.8g of sodium chloride is advocated.
Smoking
Smoking raises blood pressure acutely but chronic smoking is not associated
with higher blood pressure.  Individuals with hypertension and diabetes should
be strongly advised to avoid smoking as it is the most effective way to reduce
cardiovascular risk.
Alcohol
Limit consumption of alcohol to no more than 2 units a day in men and one unit
a day in women. Consumption of larger amount of alcohol is associated with a
higher prevalence of hypertension and cause resistance to antihypertensive
therapy.
Obesity
Obesity is prevalent in Type 2 diabetes. It is much more common in Type 2

therapy.
Obesity
Obesity is prevalent in Type 2 diabetes. It is much more common in Type 2
diabetes who is hypertensive. Weight loss result in reduction of blood pressure
in obese hypertensive. A target BMI of 18.5 to 24.9 must be maintained. BMI of
> 30 kg/m2 is a risk factor for development of hypertension and CVD.
The Adult Treatment Panel III guideline for cholesterol management defines
metabolic syndrome as the presence of three or more of the following
conditions:
•
Abdominal obesity (waist circumference > 40 inches for men and

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
87
>35 inches for women)
•
Glucose intolerance (fasting sugar >110 mg/dl.),
•
BP > 130/85 mm Hg,
•
Triglyceride > 150mg/dl, and
•
Low HDL ( men < 40 mg/dl or women < 50 mg/dl)
Intensive lifestyle modification must be pursued in persons having metabolic
syndrome. These individuals are highly prone to develop CAD and Type 2
Diabetes.
12.3.1.2. Pharmacological treatment of hypertension
In pre-hypertension, patients must be subjected to life style modification. This
alone is adequate to control blood pressure of the individual. In stage I
hypertension, life style modification and non-pharmacologic treatment may be
continued for 3 months before starting drug therapy.  In more severe form of
hypertension, drug therapy is started at the time of diagnosis.  Following classes
of antihypertensive drugs can be started as monotherapy.  Each class has its
own advantage.
Beta Blockers

own advantage.
Beta Blockers
Those that block both B1 and B2 receptors are called non-cardioselective and
include propranolol, timolol and nodolol.  Those that block B1 receptors are
cardioselective and include atenolol and metoprolol.
In addition to their antihypertensive effect B blockers are useful for treating
IHD, various arrhythmias, noncardiac disease like migraine and essential tremor.
Betablockers have been shown to reduce cardiovascular morbidity and mortality.
They are the only class of drugs which prevent a second myocardial infarction
and sudden death.
Beta blockers have some adverse effects on glycemic control, lipid level and
peripheral blood flow.  Erectile dysfunction, fatigue, cold extremities,
bronchospasm in patients with underlying pulmonary disease, worsening of
chronic heart failure, depression and disturbed sleep may occur with B blockers.
B blockers may cause increase in blood glucose level, decreasing glucose

B blockers may cause increase in blood glucose level, decreasing glucose
stimulated insulin release by blocking B1 receptor in pancreas.  Cardio selective
agents have less impact on glycemic control and rise in blood glucose is very
much minimal.
The most consistent effect of B blockers on lipid is an increase in serum
triglyceride.  A 10 – 15% decrease in HDL cholesterol is also noted.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
88
Thiazide Diuretics (Hydrochlorthiazide)
Thiazide diuretics cause altered carbohydrate and lipid metabolism,
hyperinsulinemia, hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, hyperuricemia and
ventricular ectopics.  However, these side effects are very minimal at usual
doses.  Thiazide reduces plasma volume and it is established that plasma volume
expansion is one of the pathogenic mechanism involved in causation of
hypertension in diabetes.  Excessive reduction in plasma volume may cause
postural hypotension. Thiazides are particularly recommended in hypertension
in elderly. Thiazide diuretics cause more sexual dysfunction than Beta blockers.
ACE inhibitors (Enalapril)
These are the most promising drugs in hypertension with diabetes.  Studies
comparing the efficacy of ACE inhibitors with Hydrochlorthiazide, Beta blocker
and Calcium channel blockers show equivalent blood pressure lowering effect.

and Calcium channel blockers show equivalent blood pressure lowering effect.
Unlike other antihypertensive drugs ACE inhibitors increase insulin sensitivity
and improve glycemic control.  ACE inhibitors have been demonstrated to reduce
microalbuminuria and nephropathy in normotensive and hypertensive patients.
It improves insulin sensitivity, thereby improving glycemic control. The drug is
also helpful in heart failure.  ACE inhibitor should not be used in renal artery
stenosis. Cough sometimes is a troubling side effect.  Skin rash and angioedema
can occur in rare cases.  Postural hypotension is unusual unless the patient is
volume depleted.
Angiotensin Receptor Blocker (Losartan)
These are one of the newer additions of antihypertensive drugs. These have
effects similar to  ACE1 inhibitors. These reduces proteinuria and have additive
effect over ACE1 inhibitors.
Calcium Channel Blockers (Nifedepine)
This is an effective antihypertensive agent which is also helpful in patients with

This is an effective antihypertensive agent which is also helpful in patients with
IHD.  This has no adverse effect on lipid or blood glucose level.  Pedal edema,
constipation, headache and flushing may occur.  Postural hypotension and sexual
dysfunction is rare.
Alpha-receptor blocker
Prazocin has a very good blood pressure lowering effect. However, it can result
in postural hypotension, especially in patients having autonomic neuropathy.
This has beneficial effect on lipid and improves insulin sensitivity.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
89
Other antihypertensive
Methyldopa is safe in pregnancy.  Loop diuretics should replace thiazides if
serum creatinine is more than 2 mg%.  Potassium sparing diuretics should be
used with caution because of the risk of hyperkalemia.
12.4. Autonomic Dysfunction and Hypertension
Diabetic patients with hypertension with autonomic dysfunction have a peculiar
problem of supine hypertension and upright hypotension. These patients need
to use pressure graded elastic support in the lower extremities, take increased
amount of salt, fludrocortisone and NSAID. Supine hypertension must be treated
by elevating the head end of bed, eating small meal at bed time and low dose
calcium channel blocker.
12.5. Drug Selection in Hypertension in Diabetics
JNC 7 recommendations states that inorder to achieve target blood pressure of
< 130/80 mm Hg,  a combination of two or more antihypertensive drugs is

< 130/80 mm Hg,  a combination of two or more antihypertensive drugs is
required. Thiazide diuretics can be used as first line monotherapy.  Calcium
channel blockers are also very effective especially in patients with IHD.  ACE
inhibitors and ARB are the drug of first choice for those patients who require
renal protection.  Atenolol is of usefulness in patients with effort angina or who
have recent myocardial infarction.  If monotherapy fails, combination therapy
should be used.
National Kidney Foundation recommended blood pressure goal for patients with
diabetes to be 130/80 mm Hg and 125/75 mm Hg for patients with albuminuria
or frank proteinuria. ACE1 inhibitors are  the first line drug or frank proteinuria.
ACE1 inhibitors are the first line Drug.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
90
Gestational  Diabetes Mellitus (GDM)
Chapter 13

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
91
Gestational  Diabetes Mellitus (GDM)
Dr. B.R. Giri  MD.
Pregnancy is a stressful physiological condition. It results in important maternal
changes in structure, metabolic and endocrine functions. The product of
conception as a whole acts as a metabolic structure releasing various hormones,
all these having diabetogenic impact to the mother. Pregnancy exerts a
physiological challenge to insulin release and in the presence of diminished
beta cell reserve, glucose intolerance result. Diabetes in itself is a complex
metabolic disorder, resulting in several metabolic and physiological changes.
13.1. Diabetes in pregnancy
Diabetes in pregnancy can occur under different circumstances. These are as
follows:
1. Pregnancy in Diabetes
•
Type 1 diabetes
•
Type 2 diabetes
•
Secondary diabetes
•
Impaired Glucose Tolerance before gestation
2. Gestational Diabetes
3
IGT of pregnancy
4. Undiagnosed pre-existing diabetes

2. Gestational Diabetes
3
IGT of pregnancy
4. Undiagnosed pre-existing diabetes
5. Undiagnosed pre-existing IGT
Definition of Gestational Diabetes Mellitus :
Freinkel,  in 1985 defined GDM as carbohydrate intolerance of variable severity
with onset or first recognition during pregnancy
13.2. Risk factors to GDM
Following are some important risk factors to developing GDM. These risk factors
must be elucidated during initial consultation in the ANC clinic. In the presence
of one or more risk factors, special care must be initiated and GDM looked for
at appropriate time.
•
Maternal age more than 25 years
•
Multiparity
•
Previous history of large or small baby
•
Previous history of GDM
•
Bad obstetric history viz. still birth, abortion, past pregnancy large
baby
•
Family history of diabetes

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
92
•
Overweight pre-pregnant status
•
Ethnic origin
•
Patients own birth weight >4 kg
•
Random blood sugar > 140 mg%
•
Excess weight gain during pregnancy
13.3. Why is it important to treat GDM
Any amount of abnormal glucose intolerance result in deleterious effects in the
foetus as well as in the expectant mother. This is also an indicator to increased
risk of diabetes and cardiovascular diseases in mother as well as child later in
life.
•
Increased risk of maternal and fetal morbidity and mortality during
pregnancy
•
Mother is at increased risk of Type 2 diabetes in the future
•
Baby is at risk of Type 2 diabetes, overweight and  cardiovascular
disease later in life
13.4. Manifestations of untreated GDM
Untreated GDM may result in manifestation of one or more of the following in
the pregnant mother and unborn foetus.
13.4.1. Diabetes related
•
Lethargy
•
Thirst
•
Urinary tract infection
•
Pregnancy induced hypertension
•

•
Lethargy
•
Thirst
•
Urinary tract infection
•
Pregnancy induced hypertension
•
Recurrent thrush and UTI
•
Increased rate of DKA
•
Acceleration of chronic diabetes complications
•
Retinopathy
•
Nephropathy
•
Neuropathy
•
Cardiovascular events
13.4.2. Obstetric
•
Polydramnios
•
Premature labour
•
Prolonged labour
•
Vaginal tear and or episiotomy
•
Instrumental delivery or Caesarean section
•
Miscarriage

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
93
•
Post partum haemorrhage
•
Post partum infection
13.4.3. Risks of GDM to fetus
There is a wide range of perinatal problems related to diabetes. The risks occur
from in utero to adulthood. Some of the common perinatal problems are as
follows:
•
Foetal death in utero
•
Prematurity
•
Small or large for gestational age
•
Macrosomia
•
Jaundice
•
Hypoglycaemia
•
Respiratory distress syndrome
•
Hypertrophic organs
•
Risk of diabetes and cardiovascular disease later in life
Risk of development of above complications is reduced on early and strict control
of blood sugar during the gestational period. Congenital malformations are seen
in GDM upto three times more than in general population.
13.5. Screening GDM
All pregnant women must be screened for presence of gestational diabetes
mellitus. GDM is asymptomatic and hence the need of screening. If an expectant
mother has one or more risk factors of GDM, she should be screened at the

mother has one or more risk factors of GDM, she should be screened at the
earliest opportunity. However, if no risk factors exist, she must be screened as
per the protocol.
Following  are the recommendations of 4th International Conference on GDM
by American Diabetic Association in 1997:
13.5.1. When should the be screening be done
Screening must be initiated between 24th to 28th gestation weeks. However if
one is not screened in this period, one may be screened later.
13.5.2. Who should under go the screening
All pregnant women must undergo screening

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
94
13.5.3. How is the screening done
•
No preparation is required. This can be performed at any time of day
regardless of meal.
•
50 grams oral glucose mixed in  250 ml water and drunk in 5 minutes
•
Sit quietly for 1 hour
•
Venous plasma glucose level is measured after 60 minutes
•
Blood glucose level < 140 mg% indicates that GDM is not present
•
Blood glucose level > 140 mg% tests positive for GDM
13.5.4. Oral Glucose Tolerance  in Gestational Diabetes Mellitus
Patients who test positive for GDM on initial screening and those who have
strong risks for GDM must undergo  oral glucose tolerance at 28 weeks of
gestation or thereafter.
         75 gram oral glucose  tolerance test
•
3 days of unrestricted carbohydrate diet, no smoking, no alcohol for
24 hours
•
Overnight fast 8 – 10 hours
•
Venous plasma glucose level fasting tested
•
75 grams oral glucose mixed in  250 ml water and drunk in 5 minutes
•

•
75 grams oral glucose mixed in  250 ml water and drunk in 5 minutes
•
Remain seated throughout the test
•
Venous plasma glucose level taken after 120 minutes
Fasting Blood Glucose Level  >110 mg/dl is diagnostic of  GDM
Formal 120 min Blood Glucose Level >140mg/dl is diagnostic of GDM
13.6. Clinical targets in Pregnancy
All pregnant women must maintain the measurable clinical parameters as near
normal as possible.
Some of the more important clinical parameters that must be evaluated
periodically are as follows:
Weight change should be positive in pregnancy
Overweight
  7-10 kgs
Normal
 10 - 12 kgs
Underweight  10 – 14 kgs
Blood glucose levels
Fasting  < 90mg/dl
1hr        <140mg/dl
2hr        ≤126mg/dl

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
95
Blood pressure
<130/70
Ketones in urine – negative
13.7. Care of  expectant women with GDM
Care of women with GDM does not differ substantially from care required in
diabetes in other situations. However, it is noticed that meticulous control of
diabetes in pregnancy reduces risks of acute as well as chronic complications
significantly both in mother and fetus.
Following are broad principles of care of diabetes in pregnancy:
•
Eating Plan
•
Exercise
•
Medication
•
Monitoring
•
Regular obstetric and diabetes review
13.7.1. Diet in diabetes in pregnancy
A dietitian or a diabetic nurse provides medical nutrition therapy. Diabetic
mothers need the same food they need in non-diabetic state. It is only the quantity
and frequency of feeding that differs.
•
Assess the patient’s food consumption pattern and recommend
individualized meal plan
•
One must achieve optimal weight gain and hence balance calorie
recommendation with weight gain

•
One must achieve optimal weight gain and hence balance calorie
recommendation with weight gain
•
Weight gain must be around 10 kg in the entire pregnancy
•
Diet in first trimester must be as in non pregnant state
•
Calorie intake must be 30 to 32 Kcal /kg for  ideal weight in 2nd and
3rd trimester
•
The individual must eat three meals and three snacks distributed at
equal interval in the entire day.
•
Distribution of calorie must be Carbohydrate 40-55% (150 to 200 gm
per day), Protein 18-20% (1.2 to 2 gm/kg body weight), Fat  upto
30%
•
Advise to take high fiber and complex carbohydrate
•
Regular intake of meals and snacks is important
13.7.2. Physical exercise in  GDM
•
Exercise increases insulin sensitivity, lowers blood glucose level, and

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
96
increases well being and fitness level.
•
Choose light to moderate exercise that can be maintained throughout
pregnancy
•
Exercise 60 minutes a day, at least 5 days a week
•
Exercise should include aerobic and resistance training eg, walking,
swimming or water exercises, upper arm exercises etc.
13.7.3. Medication in GDM
Oral Hypoglycemic agents
Oral hypoglycemic agents are not recommended in pregnancy and hence stop
OHA if a pregnant woman is taking. Switch over to insulin.
Insulin
Insulin is used to manage hyperglycemia in GDM when it is not controlled by
diet and exercise. Short and intermediate acting insulin are preferred. Human
mono-component insulin is better as formation and trans-placental influx of
antibodies is avoided. Insulin requirement increases progressively with
progression of pregnancy due to increasing insulin resistance. Insulin is given
two to four times a day depending on the requirement.

two to four times a day depending on the requirement.
13.7.4. Medical and obstetric follow up in GDM
Medical and obstetric review and monitoring of pregnancy is important. At each
visit to the ANC, following parameters must be monitored.
•
Blood pressure
•
Blood glucose levels
•
HbA1C at 3 month interval
•
Weight change
•
Other conditions i.e. urinary tract infection, vomiting
•
Foetal growth, movement and lie of baby
13.8. GDM management during labor and delivery
Gestational diabetes mellitus need to be managed adequately during labour and
delivery. The need for hospital admission depend upon metabolic control, fetal
and obstetrical problems.  However, for all practical purposes, it is safer to have
an institutional delivery.
•
Aim  at delivering a normal sized, full term baby
•
Continue pregnancy upto 38 weeks if every thing is all right
•
In labour check blood sugar 1 to 2 hourly
•
Hyperglycemia in later weeks of pregnancy will cause neonatal

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
97
hypoglycemia due to hyperinsulinism in foetus
•
In case of elective Cesarean section, it should be done as the first case
in the morning
•
Unless blood sugar is >140 mg/dl, insulin glucose infusion is not
required
•
After placental delivery, insulin requirement falls abruptly by 25 to
50%
•
Vaginal delivery is the safest and preferred mode of delivery
13.9. GDM management after delivery
Management of GDM continues following delivery and after discharge. GDM
is a precursor of diabetes in post-pregnancy period.
Following delivery
•
Monitor mother for blood glucose, infections and other complications
of delivery
•
Look for neonatal hypoglycemia, hypocalcaemia, respiratory distress
•
Breast  feed the child
Prior to discharge
•
Lifestyle education must be given to the mother for both mother and
baby.
•
Nutrition assessment of both mother and child must be done and
necessary diet advice given.
•

•
Nutrition assessment of both mother and child must be done and
necessary diet advice given.
•
Arrange for 75gram Oral Glucose Tolerence Test (OGTT) at 6 weeks
postpartum period. This is necessary as 50 to 60% of GDM convert to
overt diabetes mellitus and other 50% revert to IGT. Also advise yearly
OGTT to reclassify them.
•
Those patients with normal OGTT after delivery must be termed
previous abnormality of glucose tolerance of statistical risk.
•
Those GDM patients with postpartum abnormal OGTT must be termed
either IGT or DM in non-pregnant adult
13.9.1. After a GDM pregnancy, establish goals for lifestyle behavior
A mother who has been established to have GDM must change lifestyle and be
vigilant of blood sugar levels. She must follow the following:
•
healthy eating
•
planned regular exercise
•
aim for ideal weight
•
stop smoking
•
method of contraception – plan each future pregnancy
•
regular review of glucose tolerance status – OGTT each year and before

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
98
a planned pregnancy and when symptoms and signs are present
13.10. Importance of planning pregnancy in IGT or Diabetes
When an individual who knows of her IGT or diabetes status wishes to conceive,
proper planning of pregnancy must be done.
Evaluation of HbA1c   and glucose prior to and during pregnancy minimize the
risk of:
•
Congenital malformation
•
Intrauterine death
•
Maternal morbidity
•
Fetal morbidity
•
Complications during pregnancy, at delivery and post partum
13.10.1. Complications to fetus
Complications to fetus differ for different trimester of pregnancy. Following are
some known complications to fetus at different trimester.
1st Trimester
•
Congenital anomalies
•
Miscarriage
2nd and 3rd Trimester
•
Placental insufficiency
•
Prematurity
•
Respiratory distress syndrome
•
Jaundice
•
Macrosomia
•
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
•
Death in utero
•
Neonatal Hypoglycaemia
•
Foetal distress in labour
•
Shoulder dystocia
•

•
Death in utero
•
Neonatal Hypoglycaemia
•
Foetal distress in labour
•
Shoulder dystocia
•
Birth Injuries
13.10.2. Maternal complications
 The pregnant mother too can sustain various short term as well long term effect
due to pregnancy in diabetes. Mothers may develop obstetrical complications
during pregnancy or during labour.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
99
Following are some maternal complications due to pregnancy in diabetes.
Diabetes Related
•
Thrush and UTI
•
Pregnancy induced hypertension
•
Higher rate of DKA and hypoglycaemia
•
Hypoglycaemic unawareness
•
Acceleration of chronic diabetes complications
♦
Retinopathy
♦
Nephropathy
♦
Neuropathy
♦
Cardiovascular events
Obstetric Complications
•
Polyhydramnios
•
Miscarriage
•
Premature labour
•
Pregnancy induced hypertension
•
Prolonged labour
•
Instrumental delivery
•
Caesarean section
•
Post partum haemorrhage
•
Post partum infection
13.11. Preconception care
When pregnancy is planned, following are some preconception measures that a
woman contemplating pregnancy must do. However, it must be noted that even
otherwise, meticulous control of blood sugar is recommended even for non-
pregnant state to slow progression of diabetic chronic complications.
•
Contraception should be used until glycaemic control is satisfactory.

•
Contraception should be used until glycaemic control is satisfactory.
Near normalisation of blood sugar is targeted preconception as well
as during the first 6-8 weeks of pregnancy
•
When pregnancy planning is desired, oral antidiabetic agents must be
changed to Insulin atleast three months before trial of conception when
HbA1c level is achieved to < 6.5%
•
Periodic complications assessment must be carried out viz. renal
function, cardiovascular status and retinal evaluation
•
Glycaemic control of HbA1c of < 6.5% must be maintained
•
Diabetes self care skills and knowledge must be taught and assessed.
•
Nutrition assessment and adequate nutrition planning must be done.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
100
13.12. Future care
Diabetes in pregnancy must be on regular follow up as any other diabetic after
the pregnancy is over. These patients must follow all measures as any other
diabetic.
•
Regular clinic visit to monitor glycaemic control
•
Periodic complication assessment
•
Aim HbA1C < 6.5%
•
Contraception
•
Plan each future pregnancy
Regular review of glucose tolerance status for those with IGT must be done.
Oral glucose tolerance test must be performed each year and when symptoms
or signs are present


Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
101
Diabetes in children
Chapter 14

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
102
Diabetes in children
Maj (Dr.) H.P.Chhetri. MD
As in the adults, the major forms of diabetes are divided into two main groups.
Type 1 Diabetes is the most common endocrine-metabolic disorder of child
hood and adolescence. Type 2 Diabetes is usually seen in  obese children at
adolescence, also sometimes called as MODY (Maturity onset Diabetes of
Young).
14.1.Type 1 Diabetes
 Formerly called IDDM or juvenile onset Diabetes mellitus, Type1 diabetes is
characterized by low or absent levels of endogenously produced insulin. The
onset is usually in childhood with median age of 7 to 15 years, but can present
at any age. It is due to autoimmune destruction of pancreatic Islet beta cells.
Usually presentation in children may be with acute complications, primarily
ketoacidosis or with features of malnutrition. Duration of symptoms is short,
lasting usually 2-3 weeks or less. Classical symptoms of Type 1 diabetes are

lasting usually 2-3 weeks or less. Classical symptoms of Type 1 diabetes are
polydypsia, polyuria, polyphagia, decreased activity and significant weight loss.
In children nocturnal enuresis may often be noticed. Prolonged hyperglycemia
and lack of insulin lead to progressive calorie depletion which presents with
increased appetite and weight loss.
14.2. Type 2 Diabetes
Though Type 2 Diabetes is seen beyond 40 years of age, it has been increas-
ingly observed in children and adolescents as well.
Like in the adults, sedentary lifestyle and obesity are the main contributing
factors to the disease. These children have a strong family history of diabetes
and the disease presents at around 15 to 16 years of age. There is a strong asso-
ciation with insulin resistance.
As definitions, epidemiology, etiology, pathogenis and diagnosis are dealt in
other chapters, only the management part, particularly directed towards the pe-
diatric age group will be considered in this chapter.

diatric age group will be considered in this chapter.
14.3. Management of diabetes in children
Diabetes is a complex issue, management requires a team approach consisting
of pediatrician, diabetic nurse/educator, dietician and a social worker.
14.3.1.Principles of therapy
Following are some guiding principles in the management of diabetes in chil-

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
103
dren. These principles must be followed to ensure optimal growth and develop-
ment in a child living with diabetes.
1
Elimination of clinical features of uncontrolled diabetes
2
Prevention of DKA
3
Avoidance of hypoglycemia
4
Maintenance of normal growth and development
5
Early detection of associated diseases
6
Prevention of emotional disorders
7
Prevention of chronic vascular complications
14.3.2. Goals of therapy
1. Maintain balance between glucose control and hypoglycemia.
2. Eliminate polyuria and nocturia.
3. Prevent ketoacidosis.
4. Permit normal growth and development with minimal effects on
lifestyle.
14.3.3. Specific therapeutic objectives of management
Following are some very specific therapeutic objectives in managing a child
with diabetes. These objectives must be met as near as possible for optimal
management of a child with diabetes.
1
Glycosylated hemoglobin:  3 monthly - 6.5% or lower
2

management of a child with diabetes.
1
Glycosylated hemoglobin:  3 monthly - 6.5% or lower
2
Self monitoring of blood sugar daily before meal and at bedtime (fast-
ing 80-110 mg/dl and other 80-140 mg/dl)
3
Urine testing of sugar and ketones(first voided sample in the morn-
ing)
4
Urine testing for proteins (of single voided urine at each visit)
5
Serum lipids (cholesterol, HDL, LDL, VLDL fractions and triglycer-
ides annually should be normal )
6
Thyroid function tests once annually should be normal
7
Eye evaluation including fundus examination annually by an oph-
thalmologist. More frequent examinations advised if vascular changes
are noted.
8
Examination of teeth and gums by a dental hygienist/dentist once ev-
ery 6 month
14.3.4. Some aspects of diabetes management in children
The main aspects of overall management of diabetes in childhood can be broadly
divided into the following.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
104
1. Insulin therapy
2. Nutrition
3. Exercise and physical activities
4. Psychosocial aspects
5. Diabetes education
14.3.4.1.  Insulin therapy
Type 1 diabetes is managed with insulin. Various types of insulin preparations
and their duration of actions have been already covered (ref chapter 7)
The requirements of insulin in children differ at different age groups. The fol-
lowing table shows subcutaneous insulin dosing.
Table 14.1 : Subcutaneous insulin dosing
Age in years
Target glucose Total daily
Bolus  insulin
(mg/dl)
Insulin
Units to be Added
(unit/kg/dose) per 100mg/dl above target
0-5
100-200
0.6-0.7
0.5
5-12
80-150
0.7-1.0
0.75
12-18
80-150
1.0-1.2
1.0-2.0
Most of the children are placed on combination of intermediate (lente) and short
acting (regular) insulins 20 to 30 minutes before breakfast and dinner using
highly purified porcine or human insulins. The initial requirement may range

highly purified porcine or human insulins. The initial requirement may range
from 1-1.75 units/kg/day. Subsequently a partial remission may occur and re-
quirement of insulin may decrease to 0.5-0.6units/kg/day (“honeymoon”). Even-
tually insulin requirement increases to a plateau. The split-mix regime is gener-
ally practiced. In this practice the 2/3rd of the total dose is given before breakfast
and 1/3rd before dinner. The 2/3rd of each dose of insulin will be lente and 1/3rd
regular insulin. The adjustment of dose of insulin requires monitoring of blood
sugar, urine sugar, ketone bodies in the urine, diet and exercise. Premixed Insu-
lin (Mixtard 30:70) is available along with short and intermediate acting Insulin
in the Essential Drug List.
 It is important that parents and children with diabetes are educated about the
types of insulins  and purity of various types of insulin. The technique of injec-

types of insulins  and purity of various types of insulin. The technique of injec-
tion, use of disposable syringes, and selection of sites and rotation of sites for
injection should be discussed extensively. Elder children should be encouraged
to inject themselves. The injection sites should be inspected in each visit as far
as possible. Above table roughly guides requirement of insulin. However, dose
of insulin is dependent on several factors and may vary form a child to another.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
105
14.3.4.2.  Nutrition
Nutrition plays an important role in the management of children with diabetes
mellitus. This is of critical importance during childhood and adolescence as
appropriate energy intake is needed to meet the energy expenditure for growth
and pubertal developmental requirements. On the other hand nutritional treat-
ment along with insulin or other measures in combination relieves symptoms of
hyperglycemia and prevents long term complications of diabetes mellitus. The
recommended caloric intake based on size and surface of the child can be ob-
tained from standard table. The calorie intake should comprise approximately
55% of carbohydrate, 30% fat and 15% protein. The table below shows the
calorie requirement of children and young adults.
Table 14.2 : The calorie requirement of children and young adults
Age
Kcal required/kg body weight  (mean)
Children
0-12 months
120
1-10 years
100-75
Young women
11-15 years
35

Children
0-12 months
120
1-10 years
100-75
Young women
11-15 years
35
Young men 11-15 years
65
There is a gradual decline in calorie requirement as age increases.
The table below shows a summary of nutritional guidelines for children/ ado-
lescence with Type 1 diabetes mellitus.
Table 14.3 : Nutritional Guidelines for children and adolescents in Type 1
Diabetes
Nutrition
(%) of calories
Recommended daily intake
Carbohydrate
Will vary
Fiber
>20 g per day
High fiber , especially soluble
Protein
12-20
Fat
<30
Saturated
<10
Polyunsaturated
6-8
Monounsaturated
remainder of fat allowance

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
106
The achievement of nutritional goal requires cooperation of the diabetic child
as well the parents. The child can take all food that h/she was initially taking.
The division of meal is done into three major and three mid-meal snacks to
avoid hypoglycemia. A healthy diet is the same for everyone, whether or not
they have diabetes. The whole family should be eating the same food.  Sweets
are no longer off limits because the ‘diabetic diet’ is now a relic of the past.
Once the child gets to know how the body responds to eating and taking insulin,
sweets in moderation are possible accompanied by the appropriate dose of insu-
lin. However it is important to get long term glycemic control by the child for
optimal growth and prevention of complications of diabetes. The total calorie
intake can be divided so that breakfast provides 20%, lunch 20% and dinner
30%, and rest of the 30% is left for in-between meals for mid-morning, mid-

30%, and rest of the 30% is left for in-between meals for mid-morning, mid-
afternoon and evening. This is done to ensure a stable blood glucose level, avoid-
ing a big surge of blood sugar following intake of large quantity of food and
episodes of hypoglycemia in between meals.   Emphasis should be placed on
regularity of food intake and consistency of carbohydrate intake. Adjustments
in meals planning must be made depending upon the need and desire of indi-
vidual child. Nutrition must be adequate to ensure that the child continues to
grow physically.
14.3.4.3.  Exercise and physical activity
Exercise, including competitive sports, should not be forbidden to the diabetic
child. Exercise increases glucose utilization. Insulin requirement of highly fit
child is less and they have better metabolic control. It also improves self image.
Exercise should include walking, jogging, swimming and games like tennis etc.

Exercise should include walking, jogging, swimming and games like tennis etc.
Each patient with guidance of physician and under parental supervision should
develop an appropriate regime for regular planned exercise. Adjustment of in-
sulin dose and diet should be taught according to the requirement.  Early signs
of hypoglycemia should be recognized and appropriate measures   taken in terms
of correction and adjustment of insulin dose.
14.3.4.4.  Psychosocial aspects
The health worker must understand the effect of diabetes on the child as well as
the family. Diagnosis and long term management offers a challenge to the child
and the family requiring acquisition of knowledge and skill for insulin adminis-
tration, blood testing, urine testing, interpretation of signs etc. The family should
assume the prime treatment responsibility with the health worker and other
members of team acting as consultants.
14.3.4.5.  Diabetic education

members of team acting as consultants.
14.3.4.5.  Diabetic education
The children and the parents of the diabetic children need ongoing educational
and emotional support from health workers. The educators should be able to

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
107
make them aware of the need of achieving near normal blood sugar and level of
HbA1c in preventing chronic complications of diabetes. The risk of developing
hypoglycemia as an adverse effect of intensive therapy should also be explained.
Meticulous management will need achievement of expertise in insulin adminis-
tration and blood sugar monitoring at home.
14.3.5. Management of Diabetic ketoacidosis in children
Clinical signs, symptoms, and diagnosis of diabetes ketoacidosis have been al-
ready covered in the chapter on complications of diabetes (chapter 8). Manage-
ment aspect pertaining particularly to children is dealt here in this section.
More than 20% of children with diabetes present with features of diabetic ke-
toacidosis at the time of initial presentation.
Goals of treatment of DKA
1. Intravascular volume expansion
2. Correction of deficits in fluids, electrolytes, and acid-base status

2. Correction of deficits in fluids, electrolytes, and acid-base status
3. Initiation of insulin therapy to correct catabolism, acidosis
14.3.5.1  Fluid therapy
Replacement of fluid is essential for hemodynamic stability as well as
correction of acidosis. The initial fluid should be Normal Saline given in a
dose of 20 ml/kg within first hour. Saline should be given slowly there after
till signs of severe dehydration are corrected. Blood sugar level should be
monitored hourly and when sugar level falls below 300 mg/dl, 5% Dextrose
should be added to the infusion.
 14.3.5.2 Treatment of electrolyte abnormalities
Serum potassium is often elevated, though total body K+ is depleted. Potassium
is started early as resolution of acidosis following administration of insulin will
cause a decrease in serum K+. It is given in a dose of 1ml/L of IV fluid given.
Never give potassium if the child has not passed urine. Bicarbonate is almost

Never give potassium if the child has not passed urine. Bicarbonate is almost
never administered except in severe acidosis leading to cardio respiratory com-
promise.
 14.3.5.3 Insulin Therapy
Continuous low dose intravenous infusion of insulin is the most preferred way
of managing DKA in children. An initial bolus of 0.1 unit/kg followed by a
continuous IV infusion at a rate of 0.1 unit/kg/hr. The main aim is to reduce
blood sugar at the rate of 50-100 mg/dl per hour. The usual practice is to add 1
unit/kg of plain insulin in 100 ml of 0.9% saline and infuse at the rate of 10 ml/
hour. The dose can be reduced to 0.05 units/kg/hr once blood sugar level falls

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
108
below 200 mg/dl. The infusion can be discontinued once blood sugar has lev-
elled to normal range. Give subcutaneous insulin at least 30 minutes before
discontinuing the infusion.
14.3.5.4 Monitoring
Monitoring the patient is an important aspect of DKA management. Close moni-
toring of vital sign, blood sugar, state of consciousness and urinary ketone is
necessary till intravenous infusion is required. Urine out put should be checked
every 4 hour. Electrolytes and blood gas analysis should be done every 2-4 hour
depending on the degree of acidosis till the first 12 hours of initiation of therapy
where ever such facilities are available.


Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
109
Diabetes and Mouth care
Chapter 15

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
110
Diabetes and Mouth care
Dr. Karma Tobgyal MD
Diabetes Mellitus is a chronic metabolic disorder characterized by a relative
or absolute lack of insulin that results in elevated blood glucose levels and it
produces disturbances in lipid and protein metabolism.
With increasing disease prevalence, it has become critical for the dental practi-
tioner and other health professionals to.
1. Recognize signs and symptoms of diabetes, to facilitate early diagno-
sis and management.
2. Manage oral conditions, to maxima.
15.1. Diabetes and mouth
Infection, inflammation and poor wound healing in the mouth are some mani-
festations of diabetes.  Besides hypoglycemia, ketoacidosis and vascular wall
disease increases susceptibility to infection.
There is increased incidence of persistent gingivitis, periodontal abscess and
chronic periodontal diseases. Because micro vascular disease in periodontium

chronic periodontal diseases. Because micro vascular disease in periodontium
adversely affects blood flow and leukocyte migration, predisposing to prema-
ture periodontal disease, abscess and delayed wound healing, oral candida also
occurs more frequently in diabetics due to altered response to infection and
xerostomia.
 Burning tongue can be due to fungal infections such as candidiasis, or periph-
eral neuropathies, Associated with diabetes, xerostomia may be due to hyperg-
lycemia and subsequent polyuria that depletes extracellular fluids, which leads
to reduction in secretion of saliva.
Good glycemic control and meticulous home care are cornerstones in the pre-
vention and care of oral ulcers, infections, dental caries, and alveolar bone loss
because of periodontities associated with diabetes
15.2. Periodontal disease
Periodontal disease is a chronic bacterial infection that affects gum and bone
supporting teeth. It is a serious infection that, if left untreated, can result in

supporting teeth. It is a serious infection that, if left untreated, can result in
tooth loss. In untreated cases, periodontal disease can be life threatening for
diabetic patients. The disease can affect one or many teeth. It begins when the
bacteria in plague-the sticky, colorless film that constantly forms on teeth- cause
the gums to become inflammed.
Gingivitis is often caused by inadequate oral hygiene and is reversible with
professional treatment and good oral home care. Untreated gingivitis can ad-
vance to periodontities. Gums separate from teeth, forming pockets-spaces be-

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
111
tween teeth and gum- that become infected. As disease progresses, the pockets
deepen and more gum tissue and bone are destroyed. Teeth can become loose,
the way the teeth bite together may change and teeth may be lost.
15.3. Factors influencing the health of gums
Several factors influence the function of teeth and gums. Some are man made
and the others natural.
•
Genetics
•
Pregnancy and Puberty
•
Smoking and tobacco use.
•
Stress
•
Medications.
•
Clenching and grinding teeth
•
Diabetes.
People with diabetes are more likely to have periodontal disease than are people
without diabetes, probably because diabetics are more susceptible to contract-
ing infections.
Those people who don’t have their diabetes under good control are especially at
risk of dental and periodontal problems. A  recent study demonstrated that poorly
controlled Type 2 diabetic patients are more likely to develop periodontal dis-

controlled Type 2 diabetic patients are more likely to develop periodontal dis-
ease than those who have good control of diabetes.
•
More than half of all adults have, at least, early stages of gum disease.
•
About 90 percent of adults have gum disease at some time during
their lives.
•
People with diabetes are at higher risk for gum problems and tend to
have more gum disease and infections.
•
Patients can be educated about gum disease and its prevention, and it
is here that the medical professional plays an important role by en-
couraging meticulous daily oral hygiene practice.
•
Patients should be alerted of early signs of gum disease, such as bleed-
ing or slight gum discomfort.
•
Six monthly dental visits are important; more often if there are
problem.
•
For edentulous (without teeth) patient, yearly visits are recommended
for checking the health of the tissues and to detect possible infection.
15.4. Oral Hygiene in Diabetes

15.4. Oral Hygiene in Diabetes
Long term studies have proven the value of consistent and regular oral hygiene
care routines. Regular and timely dental visits are imperative to reinforce those
habits and to minimize oral health problems. The basics of oral care for all
people include brushing, flossing, mouth rinsing and tongue cleaning. Special
care in many of those areas is of utmost necessity for people with diabetes.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
112
15.4.1 Tooth brushing
Teeth should be brushed at least twice daily with soft brush. If possible,
teeth also should be brushed after meals. The use of a brush with soft bristles
is very important. Stiff bristle or too rigorous brushing can damage the gums
and increase potential problems.
15.4.2 Flossing
 Patients also should be encouraged to floss. Ideally teeth should be flossed at
least once daily. Again, a wide array of flossing products are available.  Several
types of flossing tools designed to make flossing easier are also available.
15.4.3 Mouth rinsing without alcohol content
Mouth rinsing also can be a part of good oral health, but should be taken to
select a mouth rinse that meets the patient’s specific needs. Some mouth rinses
have fluoride and are intended to decrease cavities. Those mouth rinses typi-
cally have little effects with regard to gum disease and bad breath. Other prod-

cally have little effects with regard to gum disease and bad breath. Other prod-
ucts are intended to be used before brushing and are for the purpose of increas-
ing the effectiveness of brushing. For people with diabetes the greatest areas of
concern tend to be with gum disease and bad breath. Those people need a mouth
rinse that addresses bacteria and by-products of bacteria that contribute to gum
problem.
•
The relationship between diabetes and periodontal disease goes both
ways, each making the other more difficult to manage.
•
People with diabetes are at higher risk of gum disease.
•
Diabetes should use a toothbrush with soft bristles.
•
Alcohol in mouth rinses can dry mouth and result in exacerbation of
oral health problems.
•
The tongue also can harbor bacteria and regular tongue cleaning is
recommended.
15.5 Conclusion
 People with diabetes are more likely to have periodontal disease than are people
without diabetes. Furthermore, studies have found a link between periodontal

without diabetes. Furthermore, studies have found a link between periodontal
disease and coronary artery disease in Type 1 diabetic adults.
Those people who don’t have their diabetes under control are especially at risk.
Poorly controlled Type 2 diabetes patients are more likely to develop periodon-
tal disease than are well-controlled diabetes.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
113
Hospitalization in Diabetes
Chapter 16

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
114
Hospitalization in Diabetes
Dr. B.R. Giri  MD.
Most diabetics can be managed on outpatient basis. These patients have to be
followed up regularly and patient and family members must participate actively
in the management. However, it must be remembered that these patients may
need hospitalization and meticulous indoor management occasionally. There
are certain indications for hospitalization. The physician must “err to the higher
side” for hospitalizations and at the earliest need , these patients must be
hospitalised.
16.1   Indications for  hospitalization
Following are some indications for admitting diabetic patients in hospital and
manage intensively.
Delaying admission can be deleterious for the health of the patient. Hence, these
patients must be hospitalized at the earliest indication for admission.
16.1.1. General indications
•
Life threatening acute metabolic complications of diabetes.
•

16.1.1. General indications
•
Life threatening acute metabolic complications of diabetes.
•
Newly diagnosed diabetes in children and adolescents.
•
Substantial and chronic poor metabolic control that necessitates close
monitoring of patient to determine etiology of the problem with
subsequent modification of therapy.
•
Severe chronic complications of diabetes that require intensive
treatment or other severe condition unrelated to diabetes that
significantly affect control or are complicated by diabetes.
•
Uncontrolled or newly diagnosed insulin requiring diabetes during
pregnancy, GDM requiring insulin.
•
Major modification of fixed insulin treatment regimens or to initiate
insulin treatment in those who were on OHA.
16.1.2. Acute Metabolic Complications of Diabetes
16.1.2.1 Diabetic Ketoacidosis
•
Blood glucose >250 mg/dl.
•
Arterial pH <7.35, Venous pH <7.30, or Serum bicarbonate level <15
mEq/1 and
•
Ketonuria and/or ketonemia.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
115
16.1.2.2.  Hypoglycemia with neuroglycopenia
•
Blood glucose <50 mg/dl and the treatment of hypoglycemia has not
resulted in prompt recovery of sensorium
•
Coma, seizures, or altered behavior (e.g. disorientation, unstable motor
coordination, dysphasia) due to documented or suspected
hypoglycemia
•
Hypoglycemia has been treated, but a responsible person can not be
with the patient for ensuing 12 hours
•
Hypoglycemia was caused by a sulphonylurea or insulin.
16.1.2.3.     Hypersomolar nonketotic coma
Impaired mental status and elevated plasma osmolality in a patient with
hyperglycemia.  This usually includes severe hyperglycemia (e.g. >400 mg/dl)
and elevated plasma osmolality>315 mmol/kg). Ketonuria and ketosis is not
demonstrated.
16.1.2.3. Uncontrolled Diabetes
Poor metabolic control of established diabetes as defined herein justifies
admission if it is necessary to determine the reason of poor control and to initiate

admission if it is necessary to determine the reason of poor control and to initiate
corrective measures.
•
Hyperglycemia associated with volume depletion
•
Persistent refractory hyperglycemia associated with metabolic
deterioration.
•
Recurring fasting hyperglycemia >300 mg/dl that is refractory to
outpatient therapy
•
Recurring episodes of severe hypoglycemia (i.e. <50 mg/dl despite
intervention.
•
Metabolic instability manifested by frequent swing between
hypoglycemia (<50 mg/dl and fasting hyperglycemia (>300 mg/dl)
•
Recurring diabetic ketoacidosis without precipitating infection or
trauma.
16.1.2.4. Chronic complications of Diabetes
Certain chronic complications of diabetes   like foot ulcer, chronic renal failure,
severe retinopathy or ischaemic heart disease etc need hospitalization to initiate
corrective or preventive measures.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
116
Preventing Diabetes, the way
Forward
Chapter 17

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
117
Preventing Diabetes, the way Forward
Dr. B.R. Giri  MD.
Diabetes mellitus is a chronic metabolic disorder. It is associated with a wide
range of complications. However, complication occur due to exposure of an
individual to high blood sugar over a prolonged period of time.
There are substantial evidences now that Type 2 diabetes can be prevented from
occurring as well as that complications of diabetes are either prevented or are
delayed from occurring. Progression of complications too can either be slowed
or halted.
17.1 Primary prevention
Primary prevention refers to preventing diabetes from occurring.  It is known
beyond doubt that certain conditions predispose an individual to contracting
diabetes. Diabetes can be prevented or delayed from occuring if these conditions
are made known to individuals and that they avoid those known risk factors.
17.1.1. Preventing Type 2

17.1.1. Preventing Type 2
There are certain modifiable risk factors that predispose one to developing Type
2 diabetes. These risk factors are as follows:
•
Obesity
•
Physical inactivity
•
High blood pressure
Other risk factors that can not be modified are age above 40 years; a parent,
sister or brother has diabetes, had diabetes in pregnancy and any  women who
gave birth to a large baby (> 4 kg).
Research has shown that Type 2 diabetes can be prevented from occurring by
modifying life style and changing some eating habits. This is especially so in
people more than 60 years of age.
17.1.1.1. Making wise food choices
You may not have developed diabetes but are at risk of getting it. What you eat
has a big impact on your health. Make wise food choices to keep your body
weight under control, normal blood pressure and normal cholesterol levels.
You can eat all types of food that you were eating earlier but follow the following
basic rules:
•

You can eat all types of food that you were eating earlier but follow the following
basic rules:
•
Reduce serving size of the main meals that you eat especially of those
that contain high fat like dessert, meat, cake.
•
Increase amount of intake of vegetables containing high fiber. Half of
your meal must contain vegetables

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
118
•
Eat fruits in moderation
•
Limit your fat intake to less than 20% of total calorie intake of the
day. Some practical tips of reducing fat intake are:
-
do not eat fried food
-
 avoid eating fat containing meat,
-
 remove skin of chicken before cooking,
-
avoid eating nuts
-
avoid fast food, fried potato wafers etc
•
Reduce your total calorie intake if you are overweight. Your diabetic
nurse or dietician will help you plan your meals
•
You can eat low calorie food in any amount like green salad without
topping, ‘chinta’, tea without sugar, ‘dau’ and spices to your taste.
•
Keep a record of what you eat for the entire day. You will know for
yourself where you are.
17.1.1.2. Increasing physical activity
Physical inactivity is one of the most important reasons of overweight and obesity.
Physical inactivity also results in insulin normally produced in body to be

Physical inactivity also results in insulin normally produced in body to be
insensitive and its action being less efficacious. All these contribute to developing
Type 2 diabetes
Increasing physical activity improves insulin sensitivity and prevents diabetes
from manifesting.
It is important first of all to initiate physical activity. The activity must be
gradually increased, adding a few minutes each day. One must exercise at least
60 minutes each day for all days of a  week.
Physical activity can be brisk walking, jogging, playing, gardening, going around
chorten etc.
Physical activity must be continued for life time.
17.1.1.3. Maintaining a reasonable body weight
Body weight affects health in many ways. Obesity is a contributing factor of
several disease conditions.
Body Mass index is a measure of body weight relative to height.   BMI can be
used to see whether one is  underweight, normal weight, overweight or obese.

used to see whether one is  underweight, normal weight, overweight or obese.
BMI is calculated by dividing weight in kilograms by height in meters squared.
BMI = kg/m2
BMI can also be measured by using  BMI chart.
Find  height in centimeters in the bottom of the chart.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
119
Find  weight in kilograms in the right hand side of the chart.
Move along the row and column of weight and height to find the intersecting
point.
The number at the intersection is the BMI. Check whether your BMI is normal
or abnormal.
Risk of associated disease according to BMI & Waist circumference
Body Mass Index Grade
Waist < 40 inches in
Waist > 40 inches in
men & <35 inches in men & > 35 inches
women
 in  women
18.5 or less
Underweight
18.5 to 24.9
Normal
25 to 29.9
Overweight
Increased
High
30 to 34.9
Obese
High
Very High
35 to 39.9
Highly obese
Very High
Very High
40 or greater
Extremely obese
Extremely High
Extremely High
If one is overweight or obese, choose sensible ways to get in shape.
•
Decrease amount of food that you generally eat.
•
Limit amount of fat intake
•
Increase your physical activity. Exercise most days of week. Aim at
least 60 minutes of exercise each day.
•

least 60 minutes of exercise each day.
•
Set a reasonable goal of losing at least 500 grams a week and a long
term goal of maintaining your BMI at 24 to 25.
•
Avoid crash diet
17.1.1.4. Other modifiable factors for diabetes prevention
Following are some other modifiable risk factors to diabetes. These must be
looked for periodically and adapt life style measures to prevent contracting them.
This is more so after 40 years of age.
Hypertension
Check blood pressure at every opportunity. Persons with high blood pressure
develop diabetes. If one already has hypertension, keep it under good control by
adapting life style change and medications.
Cholesterol
Check cholesterol and triglyceride at least once a year after 40 years of age.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
120
These add to the risks of complications of diabetes.
Diabetes in pregnancy
If one had diabetes in pregnancy or gave birth to a baby more than 4 kg weight,
one has high risk of developing diabetes. Check blood sugar at least once a year.
Follow other life style modification measures.
Alcohol
Moderate or stop alcohol intake. If one is a non user, do not start drinking alcohol
in any form.
Diabetes in family
If one has any one in the family (mother, father, brother or sister) who has
diabetes, one is at increased risk of getting the disease. Be extra cautious, maintain
normal body weight, remain physically active, keep a check of eating habit and
undergo periodic medical check up.
-
 avoid eating fat containing meat,
-
 remove skin of chicken before cooking,
-
avoid eating nuts
-
avoid fast food, fried potato wafers etc
•
Reduce total calorie intake if one is overweight. The diabetic nurse or
dietician will help  plan  meals
•

dietician will help  plan  meals
•
Eat low calorie food in any amount like green salad without topping,
‘chinta’, tea without sugar, ‘dau’ and spices to taste.
•
Keep a record of what is eaten for the entire day.  This is a way knowing
ones eating.
17.1.2. Preventing Type 1 diabetes
There are limited measures of preventing Type 1 diabetes because definite
preventive agents for causation of the disorder are not always identified. It is
important to immunize all children with primary series of vaccines in their first
year of age. Encourage exclusive breast feeding for the first six months of life.
17.1.3. Approaches to primary prevention
Primary prevention can be achieved by the following approaches
17.1.3.1. Population approach
Awareness on diabetes and its risk factors can be made through  approaches like
informing population through mass media, group education, school health, school
curriculum etc.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
121
17.1.3.2. High risk approach
Populations at risk are identified and stratified at increased risk of progression
based on age, BMI, family history. These individuals must be aware of diabetes
and benefits of weight loss and physical activity. It must also be understood that
risk factors of Type 2 diabetes are also the risk factors of other non-communicable
diseases.
17.2. Secondary prevention
Identifying diabetes and preventing microvascular as well as macrovascular
changes in diabetes is secondary prevention. Studies have shown that upto 50%
of diabetics at detection already have microvascular changes. Early detection of
diabetes and initiation of treatment prevent   micro as well as macrovascular
changes from occurring and halt its progression if these have already occurred.
It is important to ensure targets of glycaemic control.
17.3. Tertiary prevention

It is important to ensure targets of glycaemic control.
17.3. Tertiary prevention
Institution of aggressive therapy in persons who already have diabetes to
minimize consequences of diabetes is tertiary prevention. This ensures
containment or delay of progression of complications that ultimately reduces
morbidity, disability and mortality due to diabetes.
Table 17.2 : Strategies for Tertiary prevention
Lower limb amputation
Daily self foot examination
Foot examination at every clinic visit
Appropriate foot wear
Renal Failure
Meticulous blood pressure control
Control of hyperglycemia
Use of ACE inhibitors and ARBs
Low protein diet if indicated
Cardiovascular disease
Control of hypertension
Control of dislipidemia
Stop smoking
Diabetes is increasing in epidemic proportions world wide. This is more so for
the developing countries. It is estimated that most of the urban centers in the
South East Regional countries have more than 10% of people with diabetes.

South East Regional countries have more than 10% of people with diabetes.
The proportions may not have reached such heights in Bhutan but however,
diabetes is certainly on a rise. The good news is that secondary and tertiary

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
122
prevention are highly effective. However, the approach must be primary
prevention. More efforts must be invested now to increase awareness of the
disease, its long term complications, risk factors and lifestyle changes required
thereof in the would be diabetics who  ultimately adopt life-style that are averse
to the development of the disease. The path is arduous but it is real.

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
123
References:
1.
Diabetes Mellitus: A handbook for professionals; 3rd edition. Prof. Hajera
Mahatab, Prof. Zafar A Latif, Dr. Md. Faruque Pathan
2.
Guidelines for care of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus in Bangladesh; Prof. Hajera
Mahatab, Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Prof. A.R. Khan, Prof. Zafar A Latif, Dr. Md.
Faruque Pathan, Dr. Tofaiol Ahmed
3.
Working together to manage diabetes: A guide for Pharmacists, Podiatrists,
Optometrists, and Dental professionals. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services, Public Health Services, Center of Disease
Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention
and Health Promotion, 2004
4.
Guiding Principles for Diabetes Care: For Health Care Providers: National
Diabetes Education Program: NIH Publication No. 99-4343 April 2004
5.
The People with Diabetes: 7 Principles for Controlling Your Diabetes for
Life: National Diabetes Education Program, NIH Publication No. 99-

Life: National Diabetes Education Program, NIH Publication No. 99-
4343L, June 2002
6.
Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes: The Journal of Clinical and Applied
Research and Education in Diabetes Care: Supplement, American Diabetes
Association: Clinical Practice Recommendations, Jan.2005.
7.
Contemporary Diagnosis and Management of Type 2 Diabetes: W.A.
Hsueh, MD, Lisa Moore, MD, Michael Bryer-Ash, MD, Second Edition.
8.
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 15th edition.
9.
Scientific American Medicine; 2003 Edition.
10.
The expert committee on the diagnosis and classification of Diabetes
Mellitus: Report of expert committee on the diagnosis and classification
of Diabetes Mellitus. Diabetes care 20: 1183-1197. 1997
11.
Definition, Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes Mellitus and its
Complications: Report of a WHO Consultation. Part 1: Diagnosis and
Classification of Diabetes Mellitus. Geneva: World health Organization;
1999

Managing Diabetes Mellitus: Guide for Health Workers
124
12.
 American College of Endocrinology: Consensus statement on guidelines
for glycemic control. Endocr Pract 20021; 8 (suppl 1): 6-11
13.
Lewis EJ, Hunsicker LG, Brain RP, et al: The effect of  angiotensin-
converting enzyme inhibition in irbesartan antagonist in patients with
nephropathy due to type-2 diabetes. NEJM 2001; 345:851-860.
14.
WHO Expert Committee on Diabetes Mellitus. Second Report. Geneva:
WHO, 1980, Technical Report Series 646
15.
American Diabetic Association. Report of the expert committee on the
diagnosis and classification of Diabetes Mellitus. Diabetes Care 1997;
20: 551-555.
16.
Executive summary of the Third Report of the National Cholesterol
Education Program (NCEP) Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation and
Treatment of High Blood Cholesterol in Adults (Adults Treatment Panel
III). JAMA 2001; 285:2468-2497.
17.
Exercise and NIDDM. Diabetes Care 1990;13:785-789
18.

III). JAMA 2001; 285:2468-2497.
17.
Exercise and NIDDM. Diabetes Care 1990;13:785-789
18.
American Diabetes Association. Position statement. Nutirtion
recommendations and principles for people with diabetes mellitus.
Diabetes care 2001; 24 (Suppl 1). Available at: http://www.diabetes.org/
clinical recommendations/Supplement101/S51.htm.
19.
American Diabetes Association.  Diabetes mellitus and exercise. Diabetes
care 2001; 24 (Suppl 1). Available at: http://www.diabetes.org/clinical
recommendations/Supplement101/S51.htm.
20.
Ahmann AJ, Riddle MC: Oral Pharmacological Agents; Medical
Management of Diabetes Mellitus. New York, Marcel Dekker, 2000,pp
267-283
21.
DeFronzo RA: Pharmacologic therapy for type 2 diabetes mellitus. Ann
Intern Med 2000; 133: 73-74.